'''শেষ বিচার''', (; হলো ইব্রাহিমীয় জরাথুস্ট্র ধর্মবিশ্বাসের একটা অংশ। ==খৃষ্ট ধর্মে== ===বাইবেলিও উৎস=== বাইবেলের বহু অংশে বিশেষ করে মথির লেখা সুখবর লূকের লেখা সুখবর-এ সরু দরজা () বিষয়ে শেষ বিচারের বর্ণনা পাওয়া যায়। এর আরও উল্লেখ আছে মথির লেখা সুখবরে। Amillennialism is the view held by Christian denominations such as the Anglican, Catholic, Eastern Orthodox, Lutheran, Methodist and Churches. It holds that "the kingdom of God is present in the church age", and that the millennium mentioned in the book of Book of Revelation is "symbol of the saints reigning with Christ forever in victory." এবং রীতিবাদ==== ''upright=1.2 ''Article IV Of the Resurrection of Christ'' in Anglicanism's Articles of Religion and ''Article III Of the Resurrection of Christ'' of Methodism's Articles of Religion state that: As such, Anglican and Methodist theology holds that "there is an intermediate state between death and the resurrection of the dead, in which the soul does not sleep in but exists in happiness or misery till the resurrection, when it shall be reunited to the body and receive its final reward." This space, termed Hades, is divided into Paradise (the Bosom of Abraham) and Gehenna "but with an impassable gulf between the two". Souls remain in Hades until the Last Judgment and "Christians may also improve in holiness after death during the middle state before the final judgment". Anglican and Methodist theology holds that at the time of the Last Day, "Jesus will return and that He will 'judge both the quick and the dead'," and "all will be bodily resurrected and stand before Christ as our Judge. After the Judgment, the Righteous will go to their eternal reward in Heaven and the Accursed will depart to Hell (see )." The "issue of this judgment shall be permanent separation of the evil and the good, the righteous and the wicked" (see The Sheep and the Goats). Moreover, in "the final judgment every one of our thoughts, words, and deeds will be known and judged" and individuals will be justified on the basis of their faith in Jesus, although "our works will not escape God's examination." Belief in the Last Judgment (often linked with the General judgment) is held firmly in Catholicism. Immediately upon death each soul undergoes the particular judgment, and depending upon the state of the person's soul, goes to Heaven, Purgatory, or Hell. soul in Purgatory will always reach Heaven, but those in Hell will be there eternally. The Last Judgment will occur after the resurrection of the dead and the reuniting of person's soul with own physical body. The Catholic Church teaches that at the time of the Last Judgment Christ will come in His glory, and all the angels with him, and in his presence the truth of each man's relationship with God will be laid bare, and each person who has ever lived will be judged with perfect justice with those believing in Christ (and the unknown number of the righteous ignorant of Christ's teaching, but who are mysteriously saved through by Christ's atonement), going to everlasting bliss, and those who reject Christ going to everlasting condemnation. At that time, those already in Heaven will remain in Heaven; those already in Hell will remain in Hell; and those in purgatory will be released into Heaven. Following the Last Judgment, the bliss of Heaven and the pains of Hell will be perfected in that those present will also be capable of physical bliss/pain. After the Last Judgment the Universe itself will be renewed with new Heaven and new earth in the World to Come. The Eastern Orthodox and Catholic teachings on the Last Judgment differ only the exact nature of the in-between state of Bosom. These differences may only be apparent and not actual due to differing theological terminology and tradition (see Eastern Orthodox). ====Eastern Orthodoxy==== ১৭তম শতাব্দীতে অঙ্কিত "শেষ বিচার"। সানোক, পোল্যান্ড-এর ঐতিহাসিক মিউজিয়াম ''শেষ বিচার", বরোনেট মনাস্টারি, রোমানিয়া The Eastern Orthodox Church teaches that there are two judgments: the first, or "Particular" Judgment, is that experienced by each individual at the time of his or her death, at which time God will decide where the soul is to spend the time until the Second Coming of Christ (see Hades in Christianity). This judgment is generally believed to occur on the fortieth day after death. The second, "General" or "Final" Judgment will occur after the Second Coming. Although in modern times some have attempted to introduce the concept of soul sleep into Orthodox thought about life after death, it has never been part of traditional Orthodox teaching, and it even contradicts the Orthodox understanding of the intercession of the Saints. Eastern Orthodoxy teaches that salvation is bestowed by God as free gift of Divine grace, which cannot be earned, and by which forgiveness of sins is available to all. However, the deeds done by each person are believed to affect how he will be judged, following the Parable of the Sheep and the Goats. How forgiveness is to be balanced against behavior is not well-defined in scripture, judgment in the matter being solely Christ's. Similarly, although Orthodoxy teaches that salvation is obtained only through Christ and his Church, the fate of those outside the Church at the Last Judgment is left to the mercy of God and is not declared. ''The Last Judgment'', 1904 The theme of the Last Judgment is extremely important in Orthodoxy. Traditionally, an Orthodox church will have fresco or mosaic of the Last Judgment on the back (western) wall (see the 12th-century mosaic pictured at the top of this page) so that the faithful, as they leave the services, are reminded that they will be judged by what they do during this earthly life. The icon of the Last Judgment traditionally depicts Christ Pantokrator, enthroned in glory on white throne, surrounded by the Theotokos (Virgin Mary), John the Baptist, Apostles, saints and angels. Beneath the throne the scene is divided in half with the "mansions of the righteous" (), i.e., those who have been saved to Jesus' right (the viewer's left); and the torments of those who have been damned to his left. Separating the two is the River of fire which proceeds from Jesus' left foot. For more detail, see below. The theme of the Last Judgment is found in the funeral and memorial hymnody of the Church, and is major theme in the services during Great Lent. The second Sunday before the beginning of Great Lent is dedicated to the Last Judgment. It is also found in the hymns of the Octoechos used on Saturdays throughout the year. Lutherans do not believe in any sort of earthly millennial kingdom of Christ either before or after his second coming on the last day. On the last day, all the dead will be resurrected. Their souls will then be reunited with the same bodies they had before dying. The bodies will then be changed, those of the wicked to state of everlasting shame and torment, those of the righteous to an everlasting state of celestial glory. After the resurrection of all the dead, and the change of those still living, all nations shall be gathered before Christ, and he will separate the righteous from the wicked. Christ will publicly judge all people by the testimony of their faith— the good works of the righteous in evidence of their faith, and the evil works of the wicked in evidence of their unbelief. He will judge in righteousness in the presence of all and men and angels, and his final judgement will be just damnation to everlasting punishment for the wicked and gracious gift of life everlasting to the righteous. ==ইসলামে== '''ইসলামী পরকালবিদ্যা''' অনুসারে '''ইয়াওমাল ক্বিয়ামাহ''' (আরবি: ﻳﻮﻡ ﺍﻟﻘﻴﺎﻣﺔ "‏বাংলা: পুনুরুত্থান দিবস") বা (আরবি:‎‏ ﻳﻮﻡ ﺍﻟﺪﻳﻦ‎ বাংলা: বিচার দিবস")-য় আল্লাহ তাআলা বিশ্বজগৎ ধ্বংস করবেন, মানব জ্বিন দেহের পুনুরুত্থান ঘটাবেন, তাদের বিচার করবেন এবং চিরস্থায়ীভাবে কর্মফল প্রদান করবেন। 'হল ইসলামের ছয়টি বিশ্বাসের মধ্যে একটি। কুর'আন হাদীসে, এবং আল-গাজ্জালি, ইবন কাসীর, ইবনে মাজাহ, আল-বুখারী এবং ইবনে খুযাইমাহ'র মত ইসলামী তাফসীরবিদগণের তাফসীরসমূহে সে সময়ের অসহনীয় যন্ত্রণাদায়ক পরিস্থিতি কথা বলা হয়েছে। ==ইহুদি ধর্মে== ইহুদি ধর্মে '''শেষ বিচারের''' ধারণা ভিন্ন ভিন্ন লোকের কাছে ভিন্ন ভিন্ন। অনেকের ধারণা, এটি এমন একটি দিন যেদিন সমস্ত মৃত লোককে পুনরুত্থিত করা হবে। অনেকে মনে করে, এই ''বিচার'' মৃত্যুর সময়ই হয়ে যায়। অনেকে এটাও মনে করে যে, এই ''শেষ বিচার'' শুধুমাত্র অ-ইহুদি () সম্প্রদায়ের জন্য কিন্তু ইহুদিদের জন্য নয়। ==বাহাই ধর্মে== বাব এবং বাহাউল্লাহ শিক্ষা দিয়েছেন যে ঈশ্বরের একটিই মাত্র ধর্ম যেটার ১০০০ বছর পর একজন করে সংবাদ বাহক আসেন ঈশ্বর মানবজাতির মধ্যে সম্পর্ককে নতুন করে স্থাপিত করতে। বাব (আলি মুহাম্মদ সিরাজী) বাহাউল্লাহ-র মতে, প্রত্যেকবার সেই সংবাদবাহক বা ঈশ্বর ঠিক করেন বিচার দিবস কবে ঘটবে বিশ্বাসী অবিশ্বাসীদের জন্য। বাব ''বিচার'' সম্পর্কে বলেছেন, এছাড়াও, বাবের আগমন the promised Mahdi and the coming of Baha'u'llah is the return of Christ in the glory of the Father, কুরআনে বর্ণিত শেষ দিবসের কথারই ইঙ্গিত করে। ===ভবিষ্যত বিচার দিবস=== বাব লিখেছেন, which referred to Baha'u'llah being the inner reality of The Bab. The 'Point of the Bayan' refers to The Bab Himself. Moreover, The Bab foretold the coming 'Him Whom God shall manifest', which Bahais believe is Baha'u'llah. Furthermore, Baha'u'llah wrote in the Kitab-i-Aqdas: "Whoso layeth claim to Revelation direct from God, ere the expiration of full thousand years, such man is assuredly lying imposter." The thousand years is calculated from beginning in October 1852 CE and they could refer to either lunar or solar years, which correlate to roughly the Islamic New Year of 2269 AH or October 2852 CE. In summary, it could be that 1) Baha'u'llah is the inner reality of The Bab and 2) The Maiden is the inner reality of Baha'u'llah. Therefore, that 3) One Who comes in the Station of The Maiden will be the next Rasul after the 'full thousand years'. Additionally, The Maiden spoke of Baha'u'llah: "By God! This is the Best-Beloved of the worlds, and yet ye comprehend not. This is the beauty of God amongst you, and the power of His sovereignty within you, could ye but understand." Similarly, Baha'u'llah wrote about the previous prediction of His own Revelation from God in the Epistle to the Son of the Wolf: "The Commander of the Faithful (Imám ‘Alí)—peace be upon him—moreover, saith in the “Anticipate ye the Revelation of Him Who conversed with Moses from the Burning Bush on Sinai.”" ====অতিরিক্ত বিচার দিবস==== Concerning how The Maiden will reveal the secret of the Rasul which will follow her, Baha'u'llah wrote in the voice of The Maiden: “But will conceal God’s secrets in His Scriptures and His Books,” as bidden by One mighty and bounteous indeed! “Nor shall ye find Me till the Promised One appear on Judgement Day.” ==তথ্যসূত্র== পরিভাষা পরকালবিদ্যা