'''সমধর্মী মৌলসমূহের রাসায়নিক শ্রেণী''' হল IUPAC এর নির্ধারিত পদ্ধতিতে মৌলিক পদার্থসমূহ নামকরনের মাধ্যমে পদ্ধতি। IUPAC এর অনুমোদিত নামসমূহ: ক্ষার ধাতু গ্রুপ এর ধাতুসমূহ Li, Na, K, Rb, Cs, Fr. মৃৎ ক্ষার ধাতু গ্রুপ এর ধাতুসমূহ: Be, Mg, Ca, Sr, Ba, Ra. Pnictogens গ্রুপ ১৫ এর মৌলসমূহ: N, P, As, Sb, Bi. Chalcogens গ্রুপ ১৬ এর মৌলসমূহ: O, S, Se, Te, Po. হ্যালোজেন গ্রুপ ১৭ এর মৌলসমূহ: F, Cl, Br, I, At. নিষ্ক্রিয় ধাতু গ্রুপ ১৮ এর মৌলসমূহ: He, Ne, Ar, Kr, Xe, Rn. Lanthanoids ৫৭-৭১ মৌলসমূহ: La, Ce, Pr, Nd, Pm, Sm, Eu, Gd, Tb, Dy, Ho, Er, Tm, Yb, Lu. Actinoids ৮৫-১০৩ মৌলসমূহ: Ac, Th, Pa, U, Np, Pu, Am, Cm, Bk, Cf, Es, Fm, Md, No, Lr. Rare earth elements Sc, Y, and the lanthanoids. অবস্থান্তর ধাতু গ্রুপ ৩-১২ মৌলসমূহ। uses the below hybrid system in its periodic table- and chemical element -related articles: Same as the IUPAC system above for Alkali metals, Alkaline earth metals, Halogens, Noble gases, Lanthanoids, Actinoids, and Transition metals. Rare earth elements, Pnictogens and Chalcogens are ''not'' used. Leftover elements are grouped as: ** 'Other metals' Metals that are not otherwise categorized: Al, Ga, In, Sn, Tl, Pb, Bi ** Metalloids B, Si, Ge, As, Sb, Te, Po ** 'Other non-metals' Non-metals that are not otherwise categorized: C, N, O, P, S, Se, Many other names for groups of elements are in common use, and yet others have been used throughout history. Some examples include: Precious metal group of non-radioactive metals of high economical value Platinum group Ru, Rh, Pd, Os, Ir, Pt. Noble metal group of metals that are generally resistant to corrosion. Usually includes Ag, Au, and the platinum-group metals. Coinage metals Cu, Ag, Au. Heavy metals group of metals, on the base of their density, atomic number, or toxicity. Native metals Metals that occur pure in nature, including the noble metals and others such as Sn and Pb. Post-transition metals Metals with complete d-subshells to the right of the three transition elements: Zn, Ga, Cd, In, Sn, Hg, Tl, Pb, Bi Poor metal Sometimes used to refer to the metals of the block: Al, Ga, In, Tl, Sn, Pb, Bi. Earth metal Old historic term, usually referred to the metals of groups and 13, although sometimes others such as beryllium and chromium are included as well. Transuranium elements Elements with atomic number greater than 92. Transactinide elements Elements after the actinides (atomic number greater than 103). Transplutonium elements Elements with atomic number greater than 94. Minor actinides Actinides found in nuclear fuel, other that and Pu: Np, Am, Cm. Superactinides Hypothetical series of elements 121 to 153, which includes predicted "g block" of the periodic table. Heavy atom term used in computational chemistry to refer to any element other than hydrogen and helium. Any periodic table group can also be used in this sense. Sometimes the group number is used, as in group 14 element, and sometimes the name of the first element in the group is used, as in carbon group or carbon family. == References == /> সারণী