প্রাচীন নিকট প্রাচ্য-এর মানচিত্র '''প্রাচীন নিকট প্রাচ্য''' ছিল প্রাথমিক সভ্যতার সূতিকাগার, সাধারণভাবে যার অন্তর্ভুক্ত অঞ্চল ছিলো আধুনিক মধ্যপ্রাচ্যের: মেসোপটেমিয়া (আধুনিক ইরাক, দক্ষিণ-পূর্ব তুরস্ক, উত্তর-পূর্ব সিরিয়া এবং কুয়েত), প্রাচীন মিশর (যদিও ভৌগলিকভাবে মিশরের বেশিরভাগ এলাকা উত্তর-পূর্ব আফ্রিকায় পড়েছে), প্রাচীন ইরান (এলাম, মিডিস, পারথিয়া এবং পারস্য), আনাতোলিয়া এশিয়ার মাইনর (আধুনিক তুরস্ক আর্মেনিয়া), লেভেন্ত (আধুনিক সিরিয়া, লেবানন, ইসরায়েল, ফিলিস্তিন এবং জর্ডান), মাল্টা এবং আরব উপদ্বীপ। == আরও দেখুন == প্রাচীন নিকট প্রাচ্য গবেষণা প্রাচীনকালের ইতিহাস Cities of the ancient Near East History of pottery in the Southern Levant == তথ্যসূত্র == == অধিক পঠন == Fletcher, Banister; Cruickshank, Dan, ''Sir Banister Fletcher's History of Architecture'', Architectural Press, 20th edition, 1996 (first published 1896). Cf. Part One, Chapter 4. William W. Hallo William Kelly Simpson, ''The Ancient Near East: History'', Holt Rinehart and Winston Publishers, 2nd edition, 1997. Jack Sasson, ''The Civilizations of the Ancient Near East'', New York, 1995 Marc Van de Mieroop, ''History of the Ancient Near East: Ca. 3000-323 B.C.'', Blackwell Publishers, 2nd edition, 2006 (first published 2003). == বহি:সংযোগ == The History of the Ancient Near East database of the prehistoric Near East as well as its ancient history up to approximately the destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans ... Vicino Oriente Vicino Oriente is the journal of the Section Near East of the Department of Historical, Archaeological and Anthropological Sciences of Antiquity of Rome ‘La Sapienza’ University. The Journal, which is published yearly, deals with Near Eastern History, Archaeology, Epigraphy, extending its view also on the whole Mediterranean with the study of Phoenician and Punic documents. It is accompanied by ‘Quaderni di Vicino Oriente’, monograph series. Ancient Near East.net an information and content portal for the archaeology, ancient history, and culture of the ancient Near East and Egypt Freer Gallery of Art, Smithsonian Institution The Freer Gallery houses famous collection of ancient Near Eastern artefacts and records, notebooks and photographs of excavations in Samarra (Iraq), Persepolis and Pasargadae (Iran) The Freer Gallery of Art and Arthur M. Sackler Gallery Archives The archives for The Freer Gallery of Art and Arthur M. Sackler Gallery houses the papers of Ernst Herzfeld regarding his many excavations, along with records of other archeological excavations in the ancient Near East. Ancient Near East.org—a database of the prehistoric Near East as well as its ancient history up to approximately the destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans wiki for the research and documentation of the ancient Near East and Egypt ETANA website hosted by consortium of universities in the interests of providing digitized resources and relevant web links Resources on Biblical Archaeology Ancient Near East Photographs This collection, created by Professor Scott Noegel, documents artifacts and archaeological sites of the ancient Near East; from the University of Washington Libraries Digital Image Collection Bioarchaeology of the Near East An Open Access journal ---- নিকট প্রাচ্য এশিয়ার ইতিহাস প্রাচ্য