মার্কিন যুক্তরাষ্ট্রের প্রেসিডেন্ট বারাক ওবামা। '''শিক্ষক দিবস''' হলো শিক্ষকদের সম্মানার্থে পালিত একটি বিশেষ দিবস যা বাংলাদেশ এবং ভারতসহ পৃথিবীর বহু দেশে ভিন্ন ভিন্ন দিনে উদযাপিত হয়। এদিন শিক্ষকদেরকে তাদের নিজস্ব কর্মক্ষেত্রে উল্লেখযোগ্য অবদানের জন্য সম্মাননা দেয়া হয়। ভিন্ন ভিন্ন দিনে উদযাপিত হলেও সেপ্টম্বরের তারিখ ইউনেস্কো কর্তৃক স্বীকৃত বিশ্ব শিক্ষক দিবস। ==ইতিহাস== বিংশ শতাব্দীর শুরু থেকেই বিভিন্ন দেশে শিক্ষা দিবস পালনের উদ্দ্যোগ নেয়া হতে থাকে। অধিকাংশ ক্ষেত্রে প্রতিটি দেশে কোনো বিখ্যাত শিক্ষক কিংবা উল্লেখযোগ্য মাইলফলক অর্জনকে উপলক্ষ করে এই দিবস পালন করা হয়। যেমন– ১১ সেপ্টেম্বর ''ডোমিনো ফসটিনো সার্মেন্তো''র মৃত্যু দিবসে আর্জেন্টিনা শিক্ষক দিবস পালন করে। যদিও ভারত প্রথাগতভাবে হিন্দু পঞ্জিকা অনুসারে যশোদা (জুন–জুলাই) মাসের পূর্ণিমায় গুরু পূর্ণিমা (আধ্যাত্মিক প্রাতিষ্ঠানিক শিক্ষকদের মঙ্গল কামনায় নিবেদিত) পালন করে, ১৯৬২ সাল থেকে ''সর্বপল্লি রাধাকৃষ্ণের'' জন্মদিনেও (৫ সেপ্টেম্বর) দেশটিতে শিক্ষক দিবস পালিত হয়ে আসছে। অন্যান্য আন্তর্জাতিক দিবসগুলোর মতো একই সাথে সারা বিশ্বে পালিত না হয়ে বিভিন্ন দেশে ভিন্ন ভিন্ন দিনে শিক্ষক দিবস পালিত হওয়ার এটি একটি মুখ্য কারণ। ==দেশ অনুযায়ী শিক্ষক দিবস== দেশ শিক্ষক দিবসের পালনের দিন টীকাসমূহ আফগানিস্তান সাউর (৩ অরদিভেস্থ) স্কুল বন্ধ থাকে না। তবে ছাত্র-ছাত্রীরা একত্রিত হয়ে শিক্ষকদেরকে সংবর্ধনা প্রদানের মধ্য দিয়ে দিবস পালন করে আলবেনিয়া মার্চ আলবেনিয় ভাষায় শিক্ষা প্রদানকারী প্রথম প্রতিষ্ঠানের (৭ মার্চ, ১৮৮৭) উপলক্ষে শিক্ষক দিবস পালিত হয়। আলজেরিয়া ২৮ ফেব্রুয়ারি আর্জেন্টিনা ১১ সেপ্টেম্বর আর্মেনিয়া অক্টোবর Armenia previously celebrated Teacher's Day on the first Sunday of October. Under parliamentary decision to amend the law on the Republic of Armenia Holidays and Commemoration Days, the holiday was shifted to October, which coincides with World Teachers' Day (est. 1994 by UNESCO). অস্ট্রেলিয়া অক্টোবরের শেষ শুক্রবার On Australia’s celebration of World Teachers’ Day, the NEiTA Foundation and the Australian Scholarships Group (ASG) is proud to announce the national teaching recipients of the ASG Community Merit Awards. World Teachers’ Day was started by UNESCO and is celebrated in more than 100 countries around the world each year. On its 40th anniversary this year, it represents significant token of the awareness, understanding and appreciation displayed for the contribution that teachers make to education. If it falls on 31 October, coinciding with Halloween, it is postponed week, to November. আজারবাইজান অক্টোবর Between 1965 and 1994, the first Sunday of October. Since 1994, on October, it has coincided with World Teachers' Day on October (est. 1994 by UNESCO). বাংলাদেশ অক্টোবর বেলারুশ ১৪ আগস্ট ব্রুনেই ২৩ সেপ্টেম্বর To commemorate the birth date of the 28th ruler of Brunei, Sultan Omar Ali Saifuddien III, also known as the 'Architect of Modern Brunei', who amongst other things emphasized the importance of education to his subjects by introducing policy of 'free' education whereby the citizens are charged very nominal fees for attending schools. This policy has been continued and extended by the current (29th) ruler. ভুটান মে Established and marked on the birth anniversary of the third King of Bhutan, Jigme Dorji Wangchuck, who introduced modern education to the country. বলিভিয়া জুন ব্রাজিল ১৫ অক্টোবর Established by decree regulating elementary schools in Brazil. The celebration gained popularity throughout the country, and October 15 was officially designated Teachers' Day in 1963. বুলগেরিয়া অক্টোবর On 29 September 2006, the date of October was recognized as Teacher's Day by the government. ক্যামেরুন অক্টোবর Teachers in Cameroon on Tuesday, October 2010 joined their peers worldwide to celebrate the 17th World Teachers Day. With the theme "Nation building passes through teachers", the day served as an opportunity to pay homage to teachers who toil, sometimes under conditions, to build the capacities of human resources for the socio-economic development of the country. Commemorative activities in Yaounde began on 29 September with educative talks at the Lycée Général Leclerc, and were rounded off on World Teachers Day at the Wada multi-purpose sports complex. কানাডা অক্টোবর On October, along with over 100 countries around the world, the Canadian Teachers’ Federation and its member organizations across the country celebrate World Teachers’ Day through public awareness campaign that highlights the contributions of the teaching profession. চিলি ১৬ অক্টোবর In 1967, 11 September was selected as "Día del Maestro" ("Teacher's Day"). The date was moved to December 10 in 1975, because on that day in 1945, the Chilean poet Gabriela Mistral received the Nobel Prize. In 1977, the date was renamed to "Día del Profesor" (also "Teacher's Day") and was moved again, to 16 October, to honour the founding of the Colegio de Profesores de Chile (Teachers' Association of Chile). চিন ১০ সেপ্টেম্বর In the People's Republic of China, there are some activities for students to show their appreciation to teachers, such as presenting gifts, including cards and flowers. In addition, many former students will go back to their old primary schools, middle schools and high schools to give presents to their old teachers. The government first proclaimed Teachers' Day in 1985, but has never clearly explained why it should fall on 10 September. Some believe it is due to the similar pronunciation between the word "teacher" (教师 jiao shi) and the two digits (九jiu), 10 (十shi) in the date. Some people believe it was an arbitrary choice and have proposed to change it to 28 September, believed to be the birthdate of Confucius. On September 2013, the State Council announced legislative draft endorsing the change. If adopted, it would effectively make mainland China and Taiwan share the same Teachers' Day beginning in 2014. Taiwan has observed 28 September as Teachers' Day since the 1950s. কলম্বিয়া ১৫ মে This day marks the appointment of San Juan Bautista de la Salle as the patron of teachers. In 1950, Pope Pius XII granted his approval of La Salle as patron of teachers for championing the causes of modern education. The holy founder understood the education of children as the obligation of all. Usually the schools of his time (1651–1719) only accepted young people studying towards politics or diplomacy. Juan Bautista outlined the principles of free and universal education. That same year in Colombia, the President of the Republic declared that date as Teachers' Day. কোস্টা রিকা ২২ নভেম্বর To commemorate the birth date of Mauro Fernández Acuña (11/22/1843). one of the greatest educators of the country. কিউবা ২২ ডিসেম্বর On 22 December 1961, Cuba declared itself Territory Free of Illiteracy (''Territorio Libre de (see Cuban Literacy Campaign) চেক রিপাবলিক ২৮ মার্চ The birthday of John Amos Comenius. Czech students nominate the teachers whose approach most motivates and inspires them to the ''Zlatý Ámos'' (Golden Amos) competition. The coronation of "Golden Amos" takes place yearly on 28 March. ডোমেনিকান রিপাবলিক ৩০ জুন ইকুয়েডর ১৩ এপ্রিল Celebrated on this date in honour of Juan Montalvo, an Ecuadorian teacher who planted the seeds of development in young minds. মিশর ২৮ ফেব্রুয়ারি এল সালভাদর ২২ জুন Teachers' Day in El Salvador is observed as national holiday. এস্তোনিয়া অক্টোবর In Estonia last class students grant leave to teachers by conducting lessons themselves. জার্মানি অক্টোবর গ্রিক ৩০ জানুয়ারি Derived from the Eastern Orthodox faith when the Three Holy Hierarchs and Ecumenical Teachers (Basil the Great, Gregory the Theologian and John Chrysostom) are commemorated. গুয়াতেমালা ২৫ জুন celebration in honour of the teacher María Chinchilla who died during violent riot in protest against the government. হন্ডুরাস ১৭ সেপ্টেম্বর Celebration in honour of the life of José Trinidad Reyes হংকং ১০ সেপ্টেম্বর Before the transfer of sovereignty of Hong Kong in 1997, Teachers' Day was on 28 September. After the handover to the People's Republic of China, the day was changed to 10 September, which is when the PRC celebrates the holiday. হাঙ্গেরি জুন মাসের প্রথম রবিবার ভারত হিন্দু মাস যশোদার (জুন–জুলাই) পূর্ণিমায়, এবং সেপ্টেম্বর '''গুরু পূর্ণিমা''' is an Indian and Nepalese festival dedicated to spiritual and academic teachers. This festival is traditionally celebrated by Hindus, Jains and Buddhists, to pay their respects to their teachers and express their gratitude. The festival is celebrated on the full moon day (''Purnima'') in the Hindu month of ''Ashadha'' (June–July) as it is known in the Hindu calendar of India and Nepal. This day marks the first peak of the lunar cycle after the peak of the solar cycle.The celebration is marked by ritualistic respect to the Guru, ''Guru Puja''. The Guru Principle is said to be thousand times more active on the day of Guru purnima than on any other day. The word Guru is derived from two words, ''gu'' and ''ru''. The Sanskrit root ''gu'' means darkness or ignorance, and ''ru'' denotes the remover of that darkness. Therefore, Guru is one who removes the darkness of our ignorance. Gurus are believed by many to be the most necessary part of life. On this day, disciples offer pooja (worship) or pay respect to their Guru (spiritual guide). In addition to having religious importance, this festival has great importance for Indian academics and scholars. Indian academics celebrate this day by thanking their teachers as well as remembering past teachers and scholars. The birth date of the second President of India, Dr. Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan, September 1888, has been celebrated as Teacher's Day since 1962. On this day, teachers and students report to school as usual but the usual activities and classes are replaced by activities of celebration, thanks and remembrance. In some schools, senior students take the responsibility of teaching in order to show their appreciation for the teachers. ইন্দোনেশিয়া ২৫ নভেম্বর National Teachers' Day is commemorated on the same day as the formation of the Indonesian Teachers' Association, the PGRI. National Teachers' Day is not holiday, but it is celebrated by having ceremonial activity in recognition of certain teachers, headmasters and other school staff. ইরান মে (১২ অরদিভেস্থ) The Islamic Republic government changed the original date to coincide with the assassination of Morteza Motahhari on May 1979. ইসরাইল ২৩ কিস্লেভ ইরাক মার্চ national teachers day in iraq is celebrated by the students showing appretiaton to their teachers by giving them presents, also it is celebrated by bringing traditional food into school and just having an open day in general জামাইকা মে Teachers' Day is normally celebrated on May or the first Wednesday in May. In celebration of Teachers' Day, it is common for students and parents to bring teachers gifts. Most schools close early. জর্ডান ২৮ ফেব্রুয়ারি কসোভো মার্চ লাওস অক্টোবর লাতভিয়া অক্টোবরের প্রথম শনিবার Teacher's Day is celebrated in schools on the 1st Sunday of October. Usually, some classes that day are canceled or conducted by elder grade pupils, while teachers are greeted. Lebanon মার্চ Libya ২৯ পফব্রুয়ারি Lithuania অক্টোবর Between 1965 and 1994, it was celebrated on the first Sunday of October. Since 1994, it has been celebrated on October to coincide with the World Teachers' Day (est. 1994 by UNESCO). Macedonia অক্টোবর Malaysia ১৬ মে This date was chosen because on the same day in 1956, the Federal Legislative Council of the Federation of Malaya endorsed the Razak Report, one of four reports of the Education Committee regarding education in Malaysia. The document, known as the Razak Report after Tun Abdul Razak who was Education Minister at the time, has been the basis of education in Malaysia ever since. Although it is not an official school holiday, celebrations are usually held on 16 May, or earlier if it falls on Saturday or Sunday. Maldives অক্টোবর On October, schools in the Maldives celebrate Teachers' Day with many activities. Children and students give parcels and gifts to teachers. Mauritius অক্টোবর Mexico ১৫ মে On 15 May (known as "Día del Maestro") schools in Mexico are supposed to stop normal activities and organize cultural events that promote the importance and dignity of the teachers’ role in society. In reality some schools operate as usual and others take the day off. The first Teacher's Day was celebrated on 15 May 1918. The date of 15 May was proposed at the Mexican Congress on 27 September 1917, approved on 29 October 1917 and published on December 1917. There are several possible origins for choosing this date. The first one mentions that in the city of San Luis Potosí every 15 May, group of students gathered to celebrate the birthday of their old teacher Isidore, named after Saint Isidore the Laborer, following the Mexican tradition of naming children according to the Saint celebrated the day they were born. The second origin considers the celebration of historic event in the city of Querétaro on 15 May 1867. Republic of Moldova অক্টোবর Mongolia অক্টোবর Morocco ২৮ ফেব্রুয়ারি Myanmar (aka Burma) অক্টোবর Nepal আসাদের পূর্ণ চন্দ্র দিন The full moon day is also called ''Ashad sukla purnima''; the date usually falls in mid-July. Teacher's Day is called "Guru Purnima" in Nepali, where "Guru" means teacher and "Purnima" means "Full Moon". Netherlands অক্টোবর New Zealand ২৯ অক্টোবর Nigeria অক্টোবর Teachers' day in Nigeria is usually work-free day for all rural and urban teachers. Oman ২৪ Panama ডিসেম্বর To commemorate the birth date of Manuel José Hurtado, who is known as the father of Panamanian education because of his promotion of modern universal education through the establishment of the first public schools and teachers' colleges in what is now known as Panama then part of Colombia aiming to break the vicious cycle of ignorance and poverty that afflicted the vast majority of the population. He went on to be named of Public Instruction of the State of the Isthmus. Pakistan অক্টোবর Paraguay ৩০ এপ্রিল Peru জুলাই During the independence of Peru, the Liberator José de San Martín founded the first Normal School for Men by means of resolution passed by the Marquis of Torre-Tagle on July 1822. Many years later, in 1953, the then president Manuel A. Odría decided that Teachers' Day would be commemorated every July. Philippines অক্টোবর By virtue of Presidential Proclamation No. 242, s. 2011, the National Teacher's Month is celebrated starting September through the World Teachers' Day celebration in October 5, making it the longest celebration to honor more than 500,000 teachers 2011, Teachers' Day was celebrated in schools between the months of September and October (mainly elementary and secondary levels). Teachers are presented with orchid corsages by students. Groups of students representing various grade levels perform short skits or song and dance numbers, or read poetry for their teachers in front of fellow schoolmates in school-wide activities. These activities are planned by senior students in the Student Council who coordinate the activities well in advance.For schools, program is usually organized by students for teachers on 27 September while 28 September, considered as the actual Teachers' Day, is school holiday where both teachers and students are allowed to rest. 28 September was selected as it is thought to be the birthdate of Confucius. Poland ১৪ অক্টোবর This day is the anniversary of the creation of the Commission of National Education, created in 1773 through the initiative of King Stanisław August Poniatowski. Normally, flowers and sweets will be given to teachers by kids. School play and activities can be also scheduled by student body. Puerto Rico ২০ মে In 2016, it was celebrated on the 20th of May. Usually, it is the Friday before Mother's Day.† In some cases, it has been celebrated on the first Friday of May. Kuwait অক্টোবর Qatar ক্টোবর Romania অক্টোবর Russia অক্টোবর Between 1965 and 1994, the first Sunday of October, since 1994, October, coinciding with World Teachers' Day (est. 1994 by UNESCO). Saudi Arabia ২৮ ফেব্রুযারি Serbia অক্টোবর Singapore সেপ্টেম্বরের প্রথম শূক্রবার An official school holiday. Celebrations are normally conducted the day before, where students usually get half day off. In some schools, students will put on performances to entertain and honour their teachers. Slovakia ২৮ মার্চ Commemorates the birthdate of John Amos Comenius. Somalia ২১ নভেম্বর Since 1974, Teachers' Day has been public holiday celebrated in every school. South Korea ১৫ মে Originally it was started by group of Red Cross youth team members who visited their sick ex-teachers in hospitals. Originally its date was May 26. But since 1965, its date has been 15 May, Sejong the Great's birthday. The national celebration ceremony was stopped between 1973 and 1982, but it resumed after that. In 1982, it was revived again to create climate that honors its mentor. On the day, teachers are usually presented with carnations by their students and ex-students. It is illegal to present carnations to public school teachers under the anti-graft law. South Sudan ডিসেম্বর The president of South Sudan proclaimed Teacher's Day for December 1, one month before the country's first Teacher's Day. On September, one month before the country's third Teacher's Day, it was publicly announced that they changed the date to October. Sri Lanka অক্টোবর Officially Teachers' Day is celebrated in every school on October. Spain ২৭ নবেম্বর Syria ১৮ মার্চ Taiwan ২৮ সেপ্টেম্বর Republic of China uses this day to honor teachers' contributions to their own students and to society in general. People often make use of the day to express their gratitude to their teachers, such as paying them visit or sending them card. This date was chosen to commemorate the birth of Confucius, believed to be the model master educator in ancient China. In 1939, the Ministry of Education established the national holiday as 27 August, the attributed birthday of Confucius. In 1952, the Executive Yuan changed it to September, stating that it was calculated to be the precise date in the Gregorian calendar. The festival celebration occurs in the temples of Confucius around the island, known as the "Grand Ceremony Dedicated to Confucius" (祭孔大典). The ceremony begins at 6am with drum beats. 54 musicians are dressed in robes with blue belts, and 36 (or 64) dancers dressed in yellow with green belts. They are led by Confucius's chief descendant (currently Kung Tsui-chang) and followed by ceremonial officers. Three animals are sacrificed: cow, goat, and pig. The hairs plucked from these sacrificed animals are called the Hairs of Wisdom. In addition, local education institutes and civil offices award certain teachers for their excellence and positive influence. থাইল্যান্ড ১৬ জানুয়ারি Adopted as Teachers' Day by resolution of the government on 21 November 1956. The first Teachers' Day was held in 1957. 16 January marks the enactment of the Teachers Act, Buddhist Era 2488 (1945), which was published in the ''Government Gazette'' on 16 January 1945, and came into force 60 days later. Most Thai schools close for the day to give their teachers break during the long second term. Many international schools do not, although they may hold celebrations to honour their teaching staff. There are very few public or official commemoration. টুনিশিয়া ২৮ ফেব্রুয়ারি তুরস্ক ২৪ নভেম্বর Mustafa Kemal Atatürk stated that "The new generation will be created by teachers" and as founding President adopted new alphabet for the newly founded Turkish Republic in 1923. On November 24, 1928 Mustafa Kemal officially accepted the title of head teacher of the nation's schools, granted by the cabinet of ministers. It has been celebrated since 1981 (after the 1980 Coup d'État) as The Teachers’ Day. ইউক্রেন অক্টোবরের প্রথম শনিবার At schools across the country, Teachers' Day is celebrated the Friday before the holiday with concerts and gatherings, while students usually give their teachers gifts such as flowers and sweets. At some schools exists tradition with organising pupils of senior classes to conduct lesson for minors. The ceremony of issuing the appreciation certificates may be conducted for notable teachers. সংযুক্ত আরব আমিরাত অক্টোবর যুক্তরাজ্য মে মার্কিন যুক্তরাষ্ট্র National Teacher Day is on Tuesday during Teacher Appreciation Week, which takes place in the first full week of May. The National Education Associatioন (NEA) describes National Teacher Day as "a day for honoring teachers and recognizing the lasting contributions they make to our lives". The NEA gives history of National Teacher Day: The origins of Teacher Day are murky. Around 1944, Wisconsin teacher named Ryan Krug began corresponding with political and education leaders about the need for national day to honor teachers. Woodbridge wrote to Eleanor Roosevelt, who in 1953 persuaded the 81st Congress to proclaim National Teacher Day. NEA along with its Kansas and Indiana state affiliates and the Dodge City, Kansas local NEA branch lobbied Congress to create national day celebrating teachers. Congress declared March 1980 as National Teacher Day for that year only. The NEA and its affiliates continued to observe Teacher Day on the first Tuesday in March until 1985, when the National PTA established Teacher Appreciation Week in the first full week of May. The NEA Representative Assembly then voted to make the Tuesday of that week National Teacher Day. As of November 1976, November was adopted as Teachers' Day in the U.S. state of Massachusetts. Currently, Massachusetts sets the first Sunday of June as its own Teachers' Day annually. উরুগুয়ে ২২ সেপ্টেম্বর উজবেকিস্তান অক্টোবর Uzbekistan is one of the countries where Teachers' Day is on October 1, and there is day off throughout the country. Teachers' Day has been celebrated here since 1997. ভিয়েতনাম ২০ নভেম্বর This holiday allows students to express their respect to their teacher. Students begin preparing week in advance. Many classes prepare literature and art to welcome Teachers' Day, while other students prepare foods and flowers for the parties held at their schools. Students usually visit their teachers at their homes to offer flowers and small gifts, or organize trips with their teachers and classmates. Former students also pay respect to their former teachers on this day. The holiday has its origins in meeting between educators in communist bloc nations in Warsaw in 1957. It was first celebrated in 1958 as the Day of the International Manifest of Educators; in 1982 the day was renamed Vietnamese Educators' Day. ভেনিজুয়েলা ১৫ জানুয়ারি On this day there are no classes. During the week all the teachers are honoured for their support in building the country. ইয়েমেন ২৮ ফেব্রুয়ারি সর্বমোট একুশটি দেশ অক্টোবর শিক্ষক দিবস পালন করে: আর্মেনিয়া, আজারবাইজান, বুলগেরিয়া, কানাডা, এস্তোনিয়া, জার্মানি, লিথুনিয়া, মেসিডোনিয়া, মালদ্বীপ, মরিশাস, প্রজাতন্ত্র মোল্দাভিয়া, নেদারল্যান্ডস, পাকিস্তান, ফিলিপাইন, কুয়েত, কাতার, রোমানিয়া, রাশিয়া, সার্বিয়া, সংযুক্ত আরব আমিরাত এবং যুক্তরাজ্য। এগারোটি দেশ ২৮ ফেব্রুয়ারি শিক্ষক দিবস পালন করে: মরক্কো, আলজেরিয়া, তিউনিসিয়া, লিবিয়া, মিশর, জর্ডান, সৌদি আরব, ইয়েমেন, বাহরাইন, সুদান ওমান। ==তথ্যসূত্র== ==বহিঃ সংযোগ== ইউনেস্কোর শিক্ষা দিবস সম্পর্কিত ওয়েবসাইট