55px 70px ইউনেস্কো বিশ্ব ঐতিহ্যবাহী স্থান সেই জায়গাগুলিকে বলা হয় যেগুলি ১৯৭২ সালের ইউনেস্কো বিশ্ব ঐতিহ্য অধিবেশন অনুযায়ী গুরুত্বপূর্ণ সাংস্কৃতিক বা প্রাকৃতিক ঐতিহ্য হিসেবে গণ্য করা হয়। স্পেন মে ৪, ১৯৮২ সালে এই অধিবেশন অনুমোদন করে যার ফলে সেই দেশের ঐতিহ্যবাহী স্থানগুলি এই তালিকায় অন্তর্ভুক্ত হয়। ১৯৮৪ সালে আর্জেন্টিনার বুয়েনোস আইরেসে অবস্থিত বিশ্ব ঐতিহ্য কমিটির অষ্টম অধিবেশনে স্পেনের প্রথম স্থানটি তালিকাভুক্ত করা হয়। ওই অধিবেশনে পাঁচটি জায়গা তালিকাভুক্ত হয়। করদোবার মসজিদ-গির্জা, গ্রানাডার আলহাম্বরা জেনেরালাইফ, বুরজো গির্জা, মাদ্রিদে মঠ এসকোরিয়ালের স্থান এবং বার্সেলোনায় পার্ক গুয়েল, পালাউ গুয়েল কাসা মিলা। ==স্থানসমূহের অবস্থান== ==স্থানসমূহের তালিকা== নিন্মক্ত টেবিলে প্রতেকটি বিশ্ব ঐতিহ্যবাহী স্থানের তথ্য আছে: :'''নাম''': বিশ্ব ঐতিহ্য কমিটির তালিকা অনুযায়ী :'''অবস্থান''': শহর, প্রদেশ বা জেলা স্পেনের স্বায়ত্বশাসিত সম্প্রদায়গুলির ১৭টির কোনটি :'''সময়কাল''': কোন সময়কালে তৈরী :'''ইউনেস্কো তথ্য''': স্থানটির পরিচিতি সংখ্যা; বিশ্ব ঐতিহ্যবাহী স্থান হিসেবে তালিকাভুক্তির সাল; কোন মানদণ্ড অনুযায়ী তালিকাভুক্ত করা হয়েছিল: সাংস্কৃতিক এবং ১০ প্রাকৃতিক :'''বর্ণনা''': স্থানটির সংক্ষিপ্ত বর্ণনা নাম ছবি অবস্থান সম্প্রদায় সময়কাল ইউনেস্কো তথ্য বর্ণনা তথ্যসূত্র Cave of Altamira and Paleolithic Cave Art of Northern Spain 100px Cantabria, Asturias, Basque Country The Cave of Altamira contains examples of cave painting from the Upper Paleolithic period, ranging from 35,000 to 11,000 BC. The original listing contained seventeen decorated caves. The caves are well-preserved because of their deep isolation from the external climate. Old Town of Segovia and its Aqueduct Aqueduct of Segovia Segovia Castile and León The Roman aqueduct was constructed in the 1st century, the medieval Alcázar palace in the 11th century, and the cathedral in the 16th. Monuments of Oviedo and the Kingdom of the Asturias Santa Maria del Naranco Oviedo Asturias The Kingdom of Asturias remained the only Christian region of Spain in the 9th century. It developed its own style of Pre-Romanesque art and architecture that is displayed in various churches and other monuments. The original entry titled "Churches of the Kingdom of the Asturias" and was extended to include other monuments such as La Foncalada. Historic Centre of Córdoba Mosque of Cordoba Córdoba Andalusia The original listing was the Great Mosque of Córdoba, 7th-century Catholic Church converted to mosque in the 8th century; restored to Roman Catholic cathedral in the 13th century by Ferdinand III. During the high period of the Moorish rule of the region, Córdoba had over 300 mosques and architecture that compared to that of Constantinople, Damascus, and Baghdad. Alhambra, Generalife and Albayzín Alhambra Granada Andalusia The three sites are remnants of the Moorish influence in southern Spain. The fortress Alhambra and the palace Generalife were built by the rulers of the Emirate of Granada. The Albayzín district contains examples of the Moorish vernacular architecture and was added to the listing in 1994. Burgos Cathedral Burgos Cathedral Burgos Castile and León The Gothic-style cathedral was constructed between the 13th and 16th centuries. It is the burial place of Spanish national hero, El Cid. Monastery and Site of the Escorial El Escorial San Lorenzo de El Escorial Madrid El Escorial is one of several Spanish royal sites due to its history as residence of the royal family. The palace was designed by King Philip II and architect Juan Bautista de Toledo to serve as monument to Spain's central role in the Christian world. Works of Antoni Gaudí Casa Milà Barcelona Catalonia The architecture of Antoni Gaudí is part of the Modernist style, but his designs are described as highly unique. The original listing featured Park Güell, Palau Güell, and Casa Milà; the 2005 extension added Casa Vicens, the crypt and nativity façade of Sagrada Família, Casa Batlló, and the crypt at Colònia Güell. Santiago de Compostela (Old Town) Cathedral of Santiago de Compostela Santiago de Compostela Galicia The Cathedral of Santiago de Compostela is the reputed burial-place of the apostle James, and is the terminus of the Way of St. James, pilgrimage across northern Spain. The town was destroyed by Muslims in the 10th century and rebuilt during the following century. Old Town of Ávila with its Extra-Muros Churches City wall of Ávila Castile and León The defensive wall surrounding the original town was constructed in the 11th century. It features 82 semicircular towers and gates, and is one of the most complete examples of town walls in Spain. Mudéjar Architecture of Aragon Cathedral of Teruel Aragon The original listing contained four churches in Teruel in the Mudéjar style, blending of traditional Islamic and contemporary European styles. In 2001, the listing was expanded to include an additional six monuments. Historic City of Toledo Toledo Toledo Castile-La Mancha Toledo was founded by the Romans, served as the capital of the Visigothic Kingdom, was important in Muslim Spain and during the Reconquista, and briefly served as the capital of Spain. The city combines Christian, Muslim, and Jewish influences. Garajonay National Park Garajonay National Park La Gomera Canary Islands The park is 70% covered by ''laurisilva'' or laurel forest, vegetation from the Paleogene period that disappeared from mainland Europe due to climate change, but had covered much of the southern continent. Old City of Salamanca Cathedral of Salamanca Salamanca Castile and León Salamanca is important as university city, as the University of Salamanca, founded in 1218, is the oldest in Spain and among the oldest in Europe. The city was first conquered by the Carthaginians in the 3rd century, and later ruled by the Romans and Moors. The city centre represents Romanesque, Gothic, Moorish, Renaissance, and Baroque architecture. Cathedral, Alcázar and Archivo de Indias in Seville Cathedral and Archivo de Indias of Seville Seville Andalusia The Alcázar was built during the Almohad dynasty that ruled southern Spain until the Reconquista. The cathedral dates to the 15th century and holds the tombs of Ferdinand III and Christopher Columbus. The Archivo (Archive) houses documents relating to the colonization of the Americas. Old Town of Cáceres Cáceres Cáceres Extremadura The old town combines Roman, Islamic, Northern Gothic, and Italian Renaissance architectural influences, including more than 30 Islamic towers. Ibiza, Biodiversity and Culture Ibiza Ibiza Balearic Islands The coast of Ibiza is home to ''posidonia oceanica'', seagrass only found in the Mediterranean that supports diverse coastal and marine ecosystem. The island also contains numerous Phoenician ruins, and the fortified and walled older portions of the city date to the 16th century. Poblet Monastery Poblet Monastery Vimbodí Catalonia The monastery was founded by the Cistercians in 1151 and is one of the largest in Spain. It is associated with various royal families in medieval Spain, particularly the kings of the Crown of Aragon, composite monarchy of the dynastic union of the Kingdom of Aragon and the County of Barcelona. It is the burial place of Ramon Berenguer IV Compte de Barcelona, Alfons II d'Aragó, Pere II d'Aragó, Jaume d'Aragó, Pere III d'Aragó, Alfons III d'Aragó, Jaume II d'Aragó, Alfons IV d'Aragó, Pere IV d'Aragó, Joan d'Aragó and Martí d'Aragó. Renaissance Monumental Ensembles of Úbeda and Baeza Cathedral of Baeza Andalusia Renovations of the two towns in the 16th century were done under the emerging Renaissance style and are among the first examples of the style in Spain. Archaeological Ensemble of Mérida Roman Theatre of Mérida Mérida Extremadura Mérida was founded in 25 BC by the Romans as ''Emerita Augusta'' and was the capital of the Lusitania province. Remains from the Roman era include bridge, aqueduct, amphitheatre, theatre, circus, and forum. Royal Monastery of Santa María de Guadalupe Santa María de Guadalupe Guadalupe Extremadura The monastery is home of Our Lady of Guadalupe, shrine to Mary found in the 13th century after being buried from Muslim invaders in 714. The Virgin of Guadalupe and the monastery served as important symbols during the Reconquista, culminating in 1492, the same year as Columbus' discovery of America. The Guadalupe Virgin became an important symbol during the evangelization of America. Route of Santiago de Compostela Cathedral of Santiago de Compostela The Route, or the Way of St. James, is pilgrimage from the French-Spanish border to the Cathedral of Santiago de Compostela, where the apostle James is believed to be buried. Doñana National Park Doñana National Park Andalusia The park consists of the delta region where the Guadalquivir River reaches the Atlantic Ocean. It is home to diverse variety of biotopes, such as lagoons, marshlands, dunes, and maquis. The park is one of the largest heronries in the Mediterranean region and holds more than 500,000 water fowl during the winter period. Pirineos Monte Perdido Ordesa Valley Province of Huesca Aragon (shared with France) The site contains the Pyrenees mountain chain along the French-Spanish border. The Spanish portion contains two of the largest canyons in Europe, while the French side contains three large cirque walls Historic Walled Town of Cuenca Cuenca Cuenca Castile-La Mancha The Moors built the fortified city in the early 8th century, and it was captured by the Christians in the 12th century. The cathedral is the first Gothic example in Spain. The town is also famous for its ''casas colgadas'', houses that hang over the edge of cliff. La Lonja de la Seda de Valencia La Lonja Valencia Valencia La ''Lonja'' (or ''Llotja'' in Valencian language) ''de la Seda'' means Silk Exchange in English, and the group of Gothic buildings demonstrate the wealth of Valencia as an important Mediterranean and European mercantile city in the period. Las Médulas Las Médulas Ponferrada Castile and León The Romans established gold mine and worked the site for two centuries. They used an early form of hydraulic mining and cut aqueducts in the rock cliffs to provide water for the operations. The Romans left in the early 3rd century, leaving sheer cliff faces and mining infrastructure that is intact today. Palau de la Música Catalana and Hospital de Sant Pau, Barcelona Hospital de Sant Pau Barcelona Catalonia Both buildings were constructed in the early 20th century and designed by Lluís Domènech Montaner in the modernist Art Nouveau movement that was very popular in Barcelona in that period. The two buildings are Montaner's most famous works. San Millán Yuso and Suso Monasteries San Millán Yuso San Millán de la Cogolla La Rioja The original Suso monastery was founded in the mid-6th century, and is the location where the ''Glosas Emilianenses'' were written. The codixes are considered the first written examples of the Spanish and Basque languages, and the monastery is considered the birthplace of written and spoken Spanish. The newer Yuso monastery was built in the 16th century. Prehistoric Rock-Art Sites in the Côa Valley and Siega Verde Rock art in Côa Castile and León (shared with Portugal) The original 1998 listing contained examples of Upper Paleolithic rock art in the Côa Valley of Portugal. In 2010 it was extended to include 645 engravings in the archaeological zone of Siega Verde in Spain. The two sites represent the most well-preserved collection of open-air Palaolithic art in the Iberian peninsula. Rock Art of the Mediterranean Basin on the Iberian Peninsula Deer painting in cave The site includes over 750 examples of rock art from the late prehistoric period, which feature images ranging from geometric shapes to scenes of men hunting animals. Archaeological Ensemble of Tárraco Aqueduct of Tárraco Tarragona Catalonia The prominent Roman city of Tárraco at the site of modern-day Tarragona served as the capital of the provinces of Hispania Citerior and later Hispania Tarraconensis. The amphitheatre was constructed in the 2nd century. Most remains are only fragments or preserved under more modern buildings. University and Historic Precinct of Alcalá de Henares University of Alcalá Alcalá de Henares Madrid Cardinal Cisneros founded the University of Alcalá in 1499 and is the first example of the planned university city, serving as model to other European universities and Spanish missionaries in America. The city is the birthplace of Miguel de Cervantes, known for his contributions to the Spanish language and Western literature San Cristóbal de La Laguna San Cristóbal de La Laguna San Cristóbal de La Laguna Canary Islands The city has an original and unplanned Upper Town, and Lower Town. It was Spain's first non-fortified colonial town and served as model for development in America. Many buildings and other public and private buildings date to the 16th century. Palmeral of Elche Elche Elche Valencia The grove of date palm trees was formally laid out with irrigation systems under the Moors in the 10th century. The palmeral is rare example of Arab agricultural practices in Europe. Roman Walls of Lugo Walls of Lugo Lugo Galicia The walls built to protect the Roman town of Lucus in the 3rd century remain entirely intact and are the best remaining example in Western Europe. Catalan Romanesque Churches of the Vall de Boí Taüll Sant Climent Vall de Boí Catalonia The small valley at the edge of the Pyrenees contains churches in Romanesque style decorated with Romanesque murals, statues, and altars. The churches are unique for their tall, square bell towers. Archaeological Site of Atapuerca Atapuerca Atapuerca Castile and León The caves in the Atapuerca Mountains contain fossil remains of the earliest human beings discovered in Europe dating from nearly one million years ago. The ''Sima de los Huesos'' or "Pit of Bones" contains the world's largest collection of hominid fossils. Aranjuez Cultural Landscape Palace at Aranjuez Aranjuez Madrid The landscape around the Royal Palace of Aranjuez was developed by the Spanish royal family over course of three centuries and contains innovative horticultural and design ideas. The area was the exclusive property of the royal family until the 19th century when the modern civilian city developed. Vizcaya Bridge Vizcaya Bridge Portugalete Basque Country The bridge was designed by Alberto Palacio to cross the Nervion without disrupting maritime traffic to the Port of Bilbao. It was built in 1893 and is the world's first transporter bridge. Teide National Park Mount Teide Tenerife Canary Islands The park contains Mount Teide, volcano and the highest elevation in Spain. Tower of Hercules Tower of Hercules Coruña Galicia The Romans built this lighthouse on rock to mark the entrance to the Coruña harbor. It is the only fully preserved and functioning Roman lighthouse. Heritage of Mercury. Almadén and Idrija Almadén Castile-La Mancha (shared with Slovenia) Almaden is an ancient (from Roman times to present day) mercury mining town with buildings relating to its mining history, including Retamar Castle, religious buildings, mining university and traditional dwellings. Cultural Landscape of the Serra de Tramuntana Serra de Tramuntana Majorca Balearic Islands The cultural landscape of Serra de Tramuntana on the north western coast of Majorca has been transformed by millennia of agriculture involving water management devices such as agricultural terraces, interconnected water works -including water mills and dry stone constructions and farms. This landscape revolves around farming units of feudal origins. Antequera Dolmens Site Antequera Andalusia is cultural heritage in series comprises by three cultural monuments (Dolmen of Menga, Dolmen of Viera and Beehive tomb of El Romeral) and two natural monuments (Peña de los Enamorados and El Torcal). phenomenon of 'landscape occurs by which the natural landmarks acquire the value of monuments while the constructions are presented under the appearance of natural landscape. ===Sites by autonomous community=== Exclusive sites refer to sites locating in single community. Shared sites refer to sites with entries in multiple communities, including Pirineos Monte Perdido, which Aragon shares with France, and Prehistoric Rock-Art Sites in the Côa Valley and Siega Verde, which Castile and León shares with Portugal. Community Exclusive sites Shared sites Castile and León Andalusia Catalonia Galicia Canary Islands Madrid Extremadura Castile-La Mancha Valencia Balearic Islands Aragon Asturias Basque Country La Rioja Cantabria Murcia Navarre ==তথ্যসূত্র== ঐতিহ্যবাহী স্থানের তালিকা বিশ্ব ঐতিহ্যবাহী স্থান