জার্মানির ইউনেস্কো বিশ্ব ঐতিহ্যবাহী স্থানসমূহের ম্যাপ জুলাই ২০১৬ অবধি এটি জার্মানির ইউনেস্কো বিশ্ব ঐতিহ্যবাহী স্থানসমূহের একটি তালিকা। এখানে ৩৮টি সাংস্কৃতিক ৩টি প্রাকৃতিক স্থান বা সবমিলিয়ে ৪১টি স্থান আছে। একটি স্থান আগে তালিকায় ছিল যা এখন বাতিল করা হয়েছে। এছারাও ইউনেস্কো বিশ্ব স্মৃতি কার্যক্রম (Memory of the World Programme) অন্তর্গত ১৭টি স্থান এই দেশে আছে। বিশ্ব ঐতিহ্য সম্মেলনকে জার্মানি ২৩ আগস্ট ১৯৭৬ সালে অনুমোদন করে। == জার্মানির বিশ্ব ঐতিহ্যবাহী স্থানসমূহ == স্থান ছবি অবস্থান নির্ণায়ক এলাকাহেক্টর (একর) সাল বর্ণনা আখিন গির্জা Aachen Cathedral alt=A Gothic, castle-like building, located in rural area and surrounded by several trees. Germanyআখিন, সাংস্কৃতিক (১), (২), (৪), (৬) ১৯৭৮ An iconic feat of architecture that sparked copies around Germany for centuries to come, Aachen's cathedral became the first-built vaulted structure since antiquity. The town itself was closely tied to Charlemagne during the cathedral's inception, which explains why it became his burial place when he died in 814. লরশের অ্যাবি Abbey and Altenmünster of Lorsch alt=A stand-alone gatehouse surrounded by many trees. Germanyলরশ, সাংস্কৃতিক :GerLor(iii), (iv) ১৯৯১ The abbey and gate or 'Torhall', are from the Carolingian era. The notable Carolingian sculptures and paintings are still in good condition. Bauhaus and its sites in Weimar and Dessau alt=A grayscale image of modern looking building. GermanyDessau and Weimar সাংস্কৃতিক :GerBer1(ii), (iv), (vi) 1996 Formed in 1919, the original Bauhaus school in Weimar was known for its role in the progression of modern art through its architecture. Although it was shut down in 1925 for political reasons, Walter Gropius was able to establish second and much more influential Bauhaus in Dessau months later, eventually attracting world-renowned artists to teach at the school before once again closing in 1933. Bergpark Wilhelmshöhe alt=Hercules Monument and the giant cascades. GermanyKassel, (iv) 2013 Bergpark Wilhelmshöhe is the largest European hillside park, and second largest park on mountain slope in the world. Its waterworks along with the towering Hercules statue constitute an expression of the ideals of absolutist Monarchy while the ensemble is remarkable testimony to the aesthetics of the Baroque and Romantic periods. Berlin Modernist Housing Estates apartment building, white four storey apartment complex GermanyBerlin, (iv) 2008 The property consists of six housing estates from 1910 to 1933. It is an example of the building reform movement that contributed to improved housing and living conditions for people with low incomes. The estates also showcase number of new designs, decoration and layouts. The lessons learned here were applied on other projects around the world. Some of the notable architects on these house were; Bruno Taut, Martin Wagner and Walter Gropius. Carolingian Westwork and Civitas Corvey 150px GermanyHöxter, (iii), (iv) 2014 Carolingian Westwork and Civitas Corvey were erected between AD 822 and 885 in largely preserved rural setting. The Westwork is the only standing structure that dates back to the Carolingian era, while the original imperial abbey complex is preserved as archaeological remains that are only partially excavated. The Westwork of Corvey uniquely illustrates one of the most important Carolingian architectural expressions. Castles of Augustusburg and Falkenlust at Brühl alt=A giant stretch of road leads to an open gate enclosing large palace. GermanyBrühl, North (iv) 1984 Augustusburg Castle, the residence of the of Cologne, and the Falkenlust hunting lodge are both examples of early German Rococo architecture. City Hall and Roland in Bremen market square alt=A dark stone gothic building in paved town square. GermanyBremen, (iv), (vi) 2004 The site consists of the city hall and the statue of Roland that stands near it. The city hall was built in the 15th century when Bremen joined the Hanseatic League. It was renovated in the 17th century, and new city hall was built nearby in the early 20th. Under the Holy Roman Empire, Bremen had extensive autonomy that allowed the town to grow and made the city hall center of power. Both the old and new city halls survived bombings during World War II. The statue of Roland was built in 1404. It stands high. Classical Weimar alt=A grayscale image of small museum with statue of two men in front. (vi) 1998 Weimar became cultural center in the late 18th and early 19th centuries. Among the many artists and writers, the city was home to Goethe and Schiller. During this same period elegant buildings and parks were built in Weimar. Collegiate Church, Castle, and Old Town of Quedlinburg alt=A town square with two visible buildings and few tourists. GermanyHarz, 1994 The preservation of old Quedlinberg allows tourists to see 16th- and 17th-century timber-framed houses and walk down streets, while the Romanesque castle and cathedral, housing the bodies of Henry and his wife, tower over the town. Cologne Cathedral alt=A large, brightly lit cathedral sits in the middle of skyline at night. GermanyCologne, (ii), (iv) 1996 While work on the Cologne Cathedral began in 1248, it remained incomplete until the Prussians picked up the task centuries later, finishing the job in 1880. It was heavily bombed in the Second World War, but restorations allowed it to become the most visited landmark in Germany, boasting 6.5 million visitors per year as of 2011. Fagus Factory in Alfeld alt=A very long building with semi-circular roof. GermanyAlfeld, (iv) 2011 Built by Walter Gropius in 1910, the factory designed to manufacture shoe last was renowned for redefining decorative values of the time period, particularly in the wide use of glass to render the building much more homogeneous, which foreshadowed his later work with the Bauhaus. Frontiers of the Roman Empire alt=A very long wall separating two large plains. GermanyCentral Lowlands, Northern England, and Southern Germany** (iii), (iv) 1987 Hadrian's Wall was built in 122 AD and the Antonine Wall was constructed in 142 AD to defend the Roman Empire from "barbarians". The World Heritage Site was previously listed as Hadrian's Wall alone, but was later expanded to include all the frontiers of the Roman Empire at its zenith in the 2nd century, ranging from Antonine's Wall in the north to Trajan's Wall in eastern Europe. Garden Kingdom of Dessau-Wörlitz alt=A small row boat navigates wide river, while forest stands in the background, hiding large tower. (iv) 2000 "The Garden Kingdom of Dessau-Wörlitz is an outstanding example of the application of the philosophical principles of the Age of the Enlightenment to the design of landscape that integrates art, education and economy in harmonious whole." Hanseatic City of Lübeck alt=A courtyard behind large building with two cone-shaped summits holds flowers and trees on its sides. 1987 Lübeck was the trading capital of the influential Hanseatic League, which monopolised trade in much of the Northern Europe. Although fifth of the city was entirely destroyed in World War II, much of the original 12th-century architecture remains. Historic Centres of Stralsund and Wismar alt=A brick building with roof tapering dramatically toward the top via large square windows. (iv) 2002 The two towns were major Hanseatic League trading centres in the 14th and 15th centuries. They then served as defensive and administrative centres for Sweden two hundred years later, notably during the Thirty Years' War. The architectural styles from both of these periods remain and are well-preserved. Luther Memorials in Eisleben and Wittenberg alt=A statue of man holding book stands in front of white building. (vi) 1996 Margravial Opera House Bayreuth alt= Bavaria (iv) 2012 Maulbronn Monastery Complex alt=Monastery courtyard with the gothic church on the left and monastery buildings on the right (iv) 1993 The Cistercian Maulbronn Monastery is considered the most complete and best-preserved medieval monastic complex north of the Alps. The main buildings were constructed between the 12th and 16th centuries, along with the monastery walls. The monastery's church, mainly in Transitional Gothic style, helped spread the Gothic style across northern and central Europe. The monastery also had large, elaborate system. Messel Pit Fossil Site alt=An open quarry pit in the middle of rolling, shrub covered hills GermanyMessel, 1995 Messel Pit is the richest site in the world for understanding the environment of the Eocene, between 57 million and 36 million years ago. In particular, it shows the early stages of mammalian evolution and includes exceptionally well-preserved mammal fossils. Some of the most notable discoveries include fully articulated skeletons and the contents of the stomachs of animals. Mines of Rammelsberg, Historic Town of Goslar and Upper Harz Water Management System alt=An aerial view showing several dammed lakes within forested and urban landscape GermanyGoslar, Upper Harz, (ii),(iii), (iv) 1992 The Upper Harz water management system was developed over period of some 800 years to assist in mining and extracting ore. The mines and their ponds began under the Cistercian monks in the Middle Ages. However, most of the works were built from the end of the 16th century until the 19th century. It is made up of an extremely complex system of artificial ponds, small channels, tunnels and underground drains. The mines were major site for mining innovation in the western world. Monastic Island of Reichenau alt=A grey and white stone church with two square towers, both capped with red, pyramidal roofs. (iv), (vi) 2000 The site includes traces of the Benedictine monastery, founded in 724, which exercised remarkable spiritual, intellectual and artistic influence throughout the surrounding region. The churches of St Mary and Marcus, St Peter and St Paul, and St George, were mainly built between the 9th and 11th centuries. Their wall paintings and decorations show an impressive artistic activity. Museumsinsel (Museum Island), Berlin alt=An ornate grey stone building on the point of an urbanized island. The building is connected by two bridges to the neighboring banks GermanyBerlin, (iv) 1999 The five museums on the Museumsinsel in Berlin, built between 1824 and 1930, are unified but diverse collection of museum collections and buildings. Each museum was built to mesh with the collection and represents the aesthetic of the different times. The collections trace the development of civilizations throughout the ages. Muskauer Park Park Mużakowski alt=A red, ornate neo-gothic castle in park-like location, the main tower of the castle is located to the left and topped with an ornate round dome and spire PolandUpper Lusatia,** (iv) 2004 landscaped park astride the Neisse River and the border between Poland and Germany, it was created by Prince Hermann von Puckler-Muskau from 1815 to 1844. Designed as ‘painting with plants’, it used local plants to enhance the existing landscape. The park spreads into the town of Muskau with parks and other green spaces. The site also features reconstructed castle, bridges and an arboretum. Old Town of Regensburg with Stadtamhof alt=Several early modern or medieval townhouses. From right to left, pale green house, large red house filling most of the picture, and white house. (iii), (iv) 2006 This medieval town contains many notable buildings that span almost two millennia and include ancient Roman, Romanesque and Gothic buildings. Regensburg’s 11th- to 13th-century architecture created town of narrow lanes flanked by tall buildings. It includes medieval patrician houses and towers, large number of churches and monasteries as well as the 12th-century Stone Bridge. Regensburg was European trade center in the Middle Ages and political center of the Holy Roman Empire that turned to Protestantism. Palaces and Parks of Potsdam and Berlin alt=Single story pale yellow ornate palace stretching from the left foreground to the right background. GermanyBerlin, Potsdam, (ii), (iv) 1990 This site contains of parks and 150 buildings constructed between 1730 and 1916. It extends into the district of with the palaces and parks lining the banks of the River Havel and Lake Glienicke. Voltaire stayed at the Sans-Souci Palace, built under Frederick II between 1745 and 1747. Pilgrimage Church of Wies alt=Ornate church interior, looking toward the entrance. The interior is white, the doors flanked by two pairs of columns which stretch to the richly painted ceiling. Above the entrance is the church's pipe organ. (iii) 1983 The Church of Wies (1745–54) is the work of architect Dominikus Zimmermann and is masterpiece of the Bavarian Rococo. Prehistoric pile dwellings around the Alps of pile house at the Pfahlbau Museum Unteruhldingen on Lake Constance in Germany (v) 2011 Contains 111 small individual sites with the remains of prehistoric pile-dwelling (or stilt house) settlements in and around the Alps built from around 5000 to 500 B.C. on the edges of lakes, rivers or wetlands. While only some of the sites have been excavated, they contain wealth of information on life and trade in agrarian Neolithic and Bronze Age cultures in Alpine Europe. Fifty-six of the sites are located in Switzerland. Primeval Beech Forests of the Carpathians and the Ancient Beech Forests of Germany alt=A thickly wooded green forest with stream bed running through it on the left hand side Germany*,*,* 2007 Primeval Beech Forests of the Carpathians, are used to study the spread of the beech tree (Fagus sylvatica) in the Northern Hemisphere across variety of environments and the environment in the forest. The addition of the Ancient Beech Forests of Germany in 2011 included five forests totaling that are added to the of Slovakian and Ukrainian beech forests inscribed on the World Heritage List in 2007. Roman Monuments, Cathedral of St. Peter and Church of Our Lady in Trier alt=Ruins of brick bath house, only one wall and about dozen arches are still visible GermanyTrier, (vi) 1986 The Roman colony at Trier was founded in the 1st century AD. It grew into major town and became one of the capitals of the Tetrarchy at the end of the 3rd century. Many of the Roman era structures are still standing in Trier. The cathedral is the oldest church in Germany, being built on the ruins of Roman buildings by Maximin of Trier in 329-346. Speicherstadt and Kontorhous District 150px GermanyHamburg, 2015 Speicherstadt and the adjacent Kontorhaus district are two densely built urban areas in the centre of the port city of Hamburg. Speicherstadt, originally developed on group of narrow islands in the Elbe River between 1885 and 1927, was partly rebuilt from 1949 to 1967. It is one of the largest coherent historic ensembles of port warehouses in the world. Speyer Cathedral alt=Looking toward the choir of brick Romanesque cathedral. The twin bell towers, the transept crossing dome, and the roof are green copper. GermanySpeyer, 1981 The romanesque Speyer Cathedral, was founded by Conrad II in 1030 and remodelled at the end of the 11th century. It was one of the grandest romanesque cathedrals in the Holy Roman Empire and the burial place of German emperors for almost 300 years. St Mary's Cathedral and St Michael's Church at Hildesheim alt=A romanesque stone cathedral, view of the north side. The green copper dome over the transept crossing is visible. (ii), (iii) 1985 The site consists of two churches in Hildesheim. The Ottonian romanesque St Michael's Church was built between 1010 and 1020. Inside it is decorated with notable wooden ceiling, painted stucco-work, and the Bernward Column. The treasures of the Romanesque Hildesheim Cathedral contain the Bernward Doors, the Hezilo chandelier, the Azelin chandelier and other treasures. The Architectural Work of Le Corbusier, an Outstanding Contribution to the Modern Movement 150px Stuttgart, Germany *,*,*,*,*N46 28 6.29 E6 49 45.61 (ii), (vi) 2016 Chosen from the work of Le Corbusier, the 17 sites comprising this transnational serial property are spread over seven countries and are testimonial to the invention of new architectural language that made break with the past. They were built over period of half-century, in the course of what Le Corbusier described as “patient research”. The Complexe du Capitole in Chandigarh (India), the National Museum of Western Art, Tokyo (Japan), the House of Dr Curutchet in La Plata (Argentina) and the Unité d’habitation in Marseille (France) reflect the solutions that the Modern Movement sought to apply during the 20thcentury to the challenges of inventing new architectural techniques to respond to the needs of society. These masterpieces of creative genius also attest to the of architectural practice across the planet. Town of Bamberg alt=A stone cathedral with two towers on the west façade and two towers flanking the choir, all four towers are topped with slender, pointed metal roofs. GermanyBamberg, Cultural:GerBam (ii)(iv) 1993 In 1007, Bamberg became the center of dioesce that was intended to help spread Christianity to the Slavs. During the 12th century the Bishops of Bamberg began program of monumental public construction. The architecture that developed influenced construction in northern Germany and Hungary. In the 18th century it became center of the Enlightenment when writers such as Hegel and Hoffmann settled in the town. Upper Middle Rhine Valley alt=A river winds between high cliffs and hills, with castle in the midground. Hesse, (iv), (v) 2002 stretch of the Middle Rhine Valley in Germany. The region is home to many castles, historic towns and vineyards and has been an inspirition for many writers, artists and composers. Völklingen Ironworks alt=View from train of numerous smoke stacks, tanks and pipes. (iv) 1994 The recently closed ironworks are the only intact example in western Europe and North America of an intact ironworks built in the 19th and 20th centuries. alt=A map showing the coast of the Netherlands, Germany and Denmark. The land is green, the Wadden Sea is dark blue and the ocean is light blue. Germany*,*,* (ix), (x) 2009,2011,2014 The Wadden Sea contains the Dutch Wadden Sea Conservation Area and the German Wadden Sea National Parks of Lower Saxony and The coast line is generally flat and has may mudflats, marshes and dunes. The site covers two-thirds of the entire Wadden Sea and is home to many plant and animal species. It is breeding ground for up to 12 millions birds annually and supports more than 10 percent of the population of 29 species. Was expanded in 2011 to include the German Wadden Sea National Park of Hamburg and in 2014 to include the Danish part of the Wadden Sea. Wartburg Castle alt=A castle perched along the edge of wooded hill. The castle has grown in several stages and consists of sections in dark stone, lighter stone, white plaster and half-timber. (vi) 1999 Wartburg Castle is located on 410 (1230 ft) precipice above Eisenach. It expanded in several sections and only few of the medieval structures still remain. The castle was rebuilt in the 19th century to its present appearance. Martin Luther translated the New Testament into German while in exile at Wartburg. Würzburg Residence with the Court Gardens and Residence Square alt=An ornate building on the left side of the picture. In the midground the center of the building projects out, with columns surrounding the main entrance. The right side of the picture is covered in gardens. (iv) 1981 The large and ornate Baroque palace was created under the patronage of the prince-bishops Lothar Franz and Friedrich Carl von Schönborn. It is one of the largest palaces in Germany. Zollverein Coal Mine Industrial Complex alt=A orange metal tower with several flywheels above building with Zollverein written in golden gothic script letters. GermanyEssen, (iii) 2001 The Zollverein industrial complex in contains all the equipment of historic coal mine which started operation about 150 years ago. Some of the 20th century buildings are also notable. ঐতিহ্যবাহী স্থানের তালিকা বিশ্ব ঐতিহ্যবাহী স্থান