'''এলিফ''' হল একটি তুর্কি ধারাবাহিক নাটক যা সাপ্তাহিক দিনগুলোতে ক্যানাল প্রদর্শিত হয়। == প্রেক্ষাপট == === এলিফ প্রথম মৌসুম === Drama series that tells the journey of little girl, pretty and kind named Elif Simsek (Isabella Damla Güvenilir) who must be separated from her mother who was ill. Because hunted by the cruel stepfather, Veysel Simsek (Hasan 'There' Balliktaş) and want to sell Elif to pay his debts due to gambling. Packed with storyline that is very interesting and touching. Elif is currently years old, her mother Melek Simsek (Sellin Sezgin) ailing deliver her to his friend to be saved from the pursuit of her stepfather. Best friend, Ayse Doğan (Ozanay Alpkan) is maid in wealthy family, where she used to work. big secret, that is actually the biological child Elif results Melek love affair with Kenan Emiroğlu (Altug Seçkiner), the crown prince of the wealthy family. Kenan does not know that Elif is his child with woman he's ever loved and to be separated because of their different fate. Their love story had runs aground because it was not sanctioned. Currently, Kenan is married and has wife, Arzu Emiroğlu (Cemre Mellis Çinar) and daughter, Tugce Emiroğlu (Zeynep Orgel) are very spoiled and bad temper. Ayse frying to get permission from the Kenan to receive Elif to be raised in the house, without having to unlock the secrets of the past. Elif forced to live at home and the luxury estates, apart from her beloved mother. === এলিফ দ্বিতীয় মৌসুম === After threat to everyone, Arzu is now person who is cornered and threatened. Allow means do so Kenan did not find out they truth about Tugce. Together with his father, Necdet Keratira (Gulhan Gurbahal), Arzu work together to hide big secret from Kenan. This causes big problem form families Emiroglu and Melek. Now there is far greater threat to Melek and Elif from Arzu. Crimes committed by Necdet and Arzu makes Melek and Kenan back together. However, Melek can not deny the fact that Kenan and Elif far apart. So she decided to keep the father and his daughter in order not to be separated again. Will the old Elif and Kenan split could meet? or even evil will win? While Selim and Zeynep satus increasingly love each other. They face all kinds of obstacles, do not lose hope, and do not give in to one another. But their happiness as an end, when Arzu fired gun at them. Zend injured, their world built on love are on their thin line between life and death. Are they going to survive? == অভিনয়ে == Elif grandma) Dilara Yüzer as Gonca Tunç (Maid of Arzu, in-love with Necdet) Beril Eda as Yeşil Feride Şükrü Veysel as Alankaya Sami Gürhan Gülbahar as Necdet Karapınar (Arzu's fr) Hakan Bozyiğit as Serdar Acar (Arzu's illegal husband) Sinem Akman as Feraye (Ipek and Pelin friend) Uğurhan as Tekin Nadir Kıvılcım Kaya as Efruz Baba (Foster father of Melih) Umut Ölçer as Erkut Şahin (Veysel friend later become Necdet assistant) Pelin Çalışkanoğlu as Pelin (Feraye friend, Zeynep competitor for Selim) Kerem Akdeniz as Sadik (Kiraz husband, assistant of Emiroğlu's family) == সম্প্রচার == The series was premiered on 15 July 2014 on Kanal 7. In Algeria, the drama was broadcast in October 2016, dubbed in Algerian Arabic on Echourouk TV. In Serbia, the drama was premiered on June 2015 on RTV Pink. In Pakistan, the drama was premiered on June 2015 on See TV. In Indonesia, the drama was broadcast on February 2016 SCTV. In Bosnia and Herzegovina, the drama was broadcast on June 2016 Televizija OBN. In Colombia, the drama was broadcast on July 2016 on Caracol TV. In Greece, the drama will be broadcast on September 2016 on EPT TV. In Perú, the drama was broadcast on September 2016 on Latina Televisión. == তথ্যসূত্র == == বহিঃসংযোগ == Official site টেলিভিশন ধারাবাহিক নাটক television soap operas Turkish television series debuts series by FremantleMedia