'''মৃত শহরসমূহ''' () বা '''বিস্মৃত শহরসমূহ''' () উত্তর-পশ্চিম সিরিয়ায় আলেপ্পো ইদলিবের মধ্যে অবস্থিত ৭০০টি পরিত্যক্ত জনবসতিকে বলা হয়। কমবেশী ৪০টি গ্রাম, যা কিনা ৮টি প্রত্নতাত্ত্বিক এলাকায় বিভক্ত, প্রাচীনকাল বাইজেন্টাইন সাম্রাজ্যের সময়ের গ্রাম্য জীবনের ঈঙ্গিতবাহী। বেশিরভাগ গ্রাম যেগুলি প্রথম সপ্তম শতাব্দীর মধ্যের, সেগুলি অষ্টম দশম শতাব্দীর মধ্যে পরিত্যক্ত হয়। স্থানসমূহ== মৃত শহরসমূহ চুনাপাথর স্তূপে অবস্থিত প্রত্নতাত্ত্বিক স্থানসমূহ ===সিমেয়ন পাহাড়, কুরদ পাহাড় and হালকা পাহাড়=== Name Image Coordinates Governorate Notes আইন দারা মন্দির() thumb আলেপ্পো An Iron Age Syro-Hittite temple dating between the tenth and eighth centuries BC, is northwest of Aleppo. বারাদ() thumb আলেপ্পো An ancient settlement, located west of Aleppo, has many old basilicas; for example, the Saint Julianus Maronite monastery (399-402 AD) where the shrine of Saint Maron is located, and basilica at the northern part of the village built in 561. বারজাকা বা বুরজ সুলেইমান গ্রাম() আলেপ্পো Located northwest of Aleppo. The site has remnants of an old hermit tower and well-preserved chapel from the 6th century. বাসুফান() thumb আলেপ্পো বাতুতা() আলেপ্পো বাজিহের() আলেপ্পো বেনাস্তুর মঠ() আলেপ্পো সেখ সুলেইমান গ্রামের চার্চসমূহ() আলেপ্পো Located west of Aleppo, is notable for its three ancient churches: ruined church located at the centre of the village, well-preserved southern basilica which was built in 602, and the Church of the Virgin Mary which belongs to the late fifth century and is considered one of the most beautiful churches in northern Syria. There is hermit tower in the northern side of the village. Church of Saint Simeon Stylites (Deir Semaan)() thumb আলেপ্পো One of the most celebrated ecclesiastical monuments in Syria and among the oldest standing Christian churches in the world. It is located about northwest of Aleppo. Cyrrhus() thumb আলেপ্পো An ancient city located north of Aleppo, is the site of Saints Cosmas and Damian Church (commonly known as Nabi Houri church), as well as Roman amphitheatre and two old Roman bridges. Deir Amman churches() আলেপ্পো Deir Mishmish Church() আলেপ্পো Deir Turmanin() thumb Idlib Fafertin Church() আলেপ্পো half-ruined Late Roman basilica dates to 372 AD; it is located northwest of Aleppo. According to the Aleppine historian Abdallah Hajjar, Fafertin Basilica is among the oldest dated churches in the world. Kafr Kira settlement in Burj Heidar village() আলেপ্পো Located northwest of Aleppo, has many half-ruined Christian structures dating back to the fourth and sixth centuries. Kafr Lab() আলেপ্পো Kafr Lusein() আলেপ্পো Kafr Nabo settlement() আলেপ্পো Located west of Aleppo, is an Assyrian settlement of the ninth century BC and the site of Roman temple which was converted into church. There are also well-preserved residential buildings from the fifth and sixth centuries. Kalota Castle and churches() আলেপ্পো Located 20 km northwest of Aleppo. The castle was originally built as Roman temple during the 2nd century AD. After converting to Christianity, the temple was turned into basilica within the 5th century. As result of the wars between the Hamadanids and the Byzantine Empire, the church was turned into castle during the 10th century. There are two well-preserved churches near the castle: the eastern church built in 492 and the western church of the 6th century. Kharab Shams Basilica() thumb আলেপ্পো One of the oldest best-preserved Christian structures in the Levant dates to the fourth century CE. The Byzantine church is located northwest of Aleppo. Kimar settlement near ''Basuta'' village() আলেপ্পো Located northwest of Aleppo, is fifth-century CE village of the Late Roman and Byzantine eras; it has many well-preserved churches, towers and old water cisterns. Mushabbak Basilica() thumb আলেপ্পো well-preserved church from the second half of the fifth century (around 470), is located west of Aleppo, near the town of Daret A'zzeh. Qatura() আলেপ্পো Refade() thumb Idlib Sargible() Idlib Set al-Roum() thumb আলেপ্পো Sinhar historic settlement() আলেপ্পো Locally known as Simkhar, is located northwest of Aleppo in an isolated valley. The village was inhabited between the second and seventh centuries. Its Basilica is among the oldest churches in Syria and dates back to the fourth century, while the nearby chapel is sixth century. Sugane village() আলেপ্পো Located northwest of Aleppo, is home to two half-ruined churches and old water cisterns. Surqanya village() আলেপ্পো Located northwest of Aleppo, preserves the remains of an old Byzantine settlement with half-ruined sixth-century chapel. Taladah Church and Monastery() Idlib Taqla() আলেপ্পো Zarzita() আলেপ্পো ===Harim Mountains (Mount Bārīshā and Mount Aʻlā)=== Name Image Coordinates Governorate Notes al-Breij() Idlib al-Kfeir() Idlib Located in the mountainous region of Mount Aʻlā, less than two kilometers from Qalb Loze Bab Al-Hawa() Idlib Located west of Aleppo on the Turkish border, is the site of several fourth-century churches and well-preserved historical gate from the sixth century AD. Babisqa() Idlib Bamuqa() Idlib Banabil() Idlib Banqusa() Idlib Baqirha() thumb Idlib Barisha() thumb Idlib Barish al-Shamali() Idlib Bashkuh() Idlib Bashmishli() Idlib Bauda() thumb Idlib Located just few kilometers from the Turkish border on the far northeastern edge of Jebel Barisha. Behyo() Idlib Beitar() Idlib Beshandlaya() Idlib Binsira() Idlib Burj Aizarara() Idlib Dahis() Idlib Dana() thumb Idlib Located north of Idlib, 38 kilometers west of Aleppo, and just east of the border with Turkey. Deirouni() Idlib Deir Qeita() thumb Idlib Deir Seita() Idlib Fasuq() Idlib Kafr Aqab() Idlib Kafr Aruq() Idlib Kafr Dariyan() Idlib Khirbet al-Khatib() Idlib Kseibjeh() Idlib Kukaniyeh() Idlib Ma'suratah() Idlib Maaz() Idlib Qalb Loze() thumb Idlib Qarqbizeh() Idlib Sarfud() Idlib Sarmada() Idlib ===Mount Zāwiya=== Name Image Coordinates Governorate Notes al-Dana() Idlib modern village on far eastern edge of Jebel al-Zawiyeh and Jebel Riha. Babuline() Idlib Bara() thumb Idlib Bashila() Idlib Batrasa() thumb Idlib Bauda() thumb Idlib Located on the side of the road between the two major sites of Bara and Serjilla. Deir Sunbul() Idlib Dellozeh() Idlib Ebla() thumb Idlib One of the earliest kingdoms in Syria. Its remains constitute tell located about 55 km (34 mi) southwest of Aleppo near the village of Mardikh. Ein Laruz() Idlib Farkya() Idlib Hazarin() Idlib Jarada() thumb Idlib Maghara() Idlib Majliya() Idlib Mozra() Idlib Qasr al-Banat() Idlib Rabiaa() Idlib Ruweiha() thumb Idlib Serjilla() thumb Idlib Shinan() Idlib Shinshirah() Idlib Wadi Martahun() Idlib ==তথ্যসূত্র==