জেমস বন্ড হল একটি কাল্পনিক চরিত্র।যে ব্রিটিশ গোয়েন্দা বিভাগে কর্মরত।সে এম আই৬ এর হয়ে কাজ করে তার কোড বা সাংকেতিক নাম ০০৭ (ডাবোল সেভেন)। ==১৯৬০== Sean Connery was the original James Bond. জেমস বন্ডের উপন্যাস নিয়ে প্রথম চলচ্চিত্র প্রকাশিত হয় ১৯৬২ সালো। চলচ্চিত্র বছর পরিচালক স্কিনরাইটার জেমস বন্ড অভিনেতা গল্প ''ডা. নং'' ১৯৬২ Terence Young Richard Maibaum, Johanna Harwood, Berkely Mather Sean Connery Chinese scientist living on small Jamaican island who, working for SPECTRE, plans to disrupt American rocket launches. ''ফর্মস রাশিয়া ইউথ লাভ'' ১৯৬৩ Richard Maibaum SPECTRE hires seductive young female Soviet agent to act as fake defector in plot to assassinate Bond; in turn 007 uses her to get Soviet decoding machine. ''Goldfinger'' 1964 Guy Hamilton Richard Maibaum, Paul Dehn Bond battles gold magnate Auric Goldfinger, who plans to irradiate the gold supply of Fort Knox, making it worthless and increasing the value of his own supply. ''Thunderball'' 1965 Terence Young Richard Maibaum John Hopkins McClory, Jack Whittingham Ian Fleming (story) Bond is sent to the Bahamas to stop Emilio Largo, playboy billionaire and deputy head of SPECTRE, from attacking major U.S. city with nuclear weapons. ''You Only Live Twice'' 1967 Lewis Gilbert Roald Dahl After faking his own death, Bond goes to Japan to investigate the hijacking of American and Soviet manned spacecraft from orbit, which turns out to be plan by Ernst Stavro Blofeld, the megalomaniacal head of SPECTRE, to start World War III. ''On Her Majesty's Secret Service'' 1969 Peter R. Hunt Richard Maibaum George Lazenby In pursuit of Blofeld, Bond discovers SPECTRE's plan for biochemical terror. Meanwhile, Bond falls in love with and marries crime lord's suicidal daughter, who is murdered on their wedding day. ==১৯৭০== Roger Moore is tied with Sean Connery for playing "James Bond" the most times, in seven films. চলচ্চিত্র বছর পরিচালক Screenwriter(s) জেমস বন্ড অভিনেতা গল্প ''ডায়মন্স আর ফিভার'' ১৯৭১ Guy Hamilton Richard Maibaum, Tom Mankiewicz Sean Connery Bond traces diamond smuggling operation first to Holland and Las Vegas and then to SPECTRE plot to build satellite with laser beams capable of destroying weapons on the ground. ''Live and Let Die'' ১৯৭৩ Tom Mankiewicz Roger Moore Bond fights voodoo priests, heroin smugglers and ruthless dictator in New York, New Orleans and San Monique in film imitating the conventions of movies of the era. ''The Man with the Golden Gun'' ১৯৭৪ Richard Maibaum, Tom Mankiewicz While trying to locate missing solar expert, Bond ends up in an intense game of cat-and-mouse with the world's top assassin, Francisco Scaramanga. ''The Spy Who Loved Me'' ১৯৭৭ Lewis Gilbert Christopher Wood, Richard Maibaum Bond teams up with female Russian agent to locate two missing nuclear submarines; he winds up dealing with man whose dream is an undersea empire. ''Moonraker'' ১৯৭৯ Christopher Wood Bond investigates the mid-air hijacking of one of the Moonraker space shuttles. The shuttle's maker, Hugo Drax, is using his shuttle fleet to help in wiping out every human on Earth and re-populating it with hand-picked racial rainbow of superior human pairs. ==১৯৮০== Timothy Dalton replaced Roger Moore as James Bond. চলচ্চিত্র বছর পরিচালক Screenwriter(s) জেমস বন্ড অভিনেতা গল্প ''ফর ইউয়োর আই ওনলি'' ১৯৮১ John Glen Richard Maibaum, Michael G. Wilson Roger Moore Bond's investigation of the murder of marine archaeologist working for the British Secret Service leads him to race against the Soviets for submarine attack computer in sunken ship. ''অক্টোপাস (চলচ্চিত্র)'' ১৯৮২ George MacDonald Fraser, Richard Maibaum, Michael G. Wilson The murder of Agent 009 and forgery of Fabergé egg lead Bond to India, where he allies with cult leader Octopussy against Kamal Khan, playboy Afghan prince, who with Russian General Orlov is plotting to "accidentally" detonate nuclear device on US air base in West Germany, hoping NATO will disarm and the Soviets can take over Europe in record time. ''এ ভিউ টু কিল'' ১৯৮৫ Richard Maibaum, Michael G. Wilson Bond investigates high-tech firm headed up by former KGB Agent and industrialist Max Zorin, and uncovers plot to corner the market on microchips by manufacturing an earthquake that would drown Silicon Valley (and all of Zorin's competition). ''দ্যা লিভিং ডেলাইটস'' ১৯৮৭ Timothy Dalton Bond teams up with female cellist to investigate the fake defector for whom she was allegedly working, General Georgi Koskov, leading them to smuggling scheme headed up by powerful arms dealer Brad Whitaker. ''লিসেনচ টু সকিল'' 1989 Bond resigns from the secret service to avenge the attempted murder of his CIA friend, Felix Leiter. His pursuit of the assailants leads him to powerful Colombian drug lord Franz Sanchez and mysterious woman, Pam Bouvier, who has an agenda of her own in bringing down Sanchez and his empire. ==১৯৮৯০== James Bond's return had him portrayed by Pierce Brosnan. চলচ্চিত্র বছর পরিচালক Screenwriter(s) জেমস বন্ড অভিনেতা গল্প ''গোল্ডেনআই'' ১৯৯৫ মার্টিন ক্যামপবেল Bruce Feirstein, Jeffrey Caine, Michael France Pierce Brosnan Bond fights to prevent syndicate of from causing global financial meltdown through usage of the GoldenEye satellite weapon against London. ''টুমোর নেভার ডাই'' ১৯৯৭ Roger Spottiswoode Bruce Feirstein Bond investigates media mogul Elliot Carver, who aims to start war between the UK and China so he can be guaranteed exclusive coverage for his new cable news channel. ''দ্যা ওয়াল্ড ইজ নট এনাফ'' ১৯৯৯ Michael Apted Neal Purvis, Robert Wade, Bruce Feirstein Bond is asked to play bodyguard to oil heiress Elektra King whose father was murdered in MI6 headquarters, and discovers she still has connection and plan to the terrorist who once kidnapped her, Renard. ==২০০০== Daniel Craig has been the most recent actor to play James Bond. চলচ্চিত্র বছর পরিচালক Screenwriter(s) জেমস বন্ড অভিনেতা গল্প ''ডাই অ্যানাদার ডে'' ২০০২ লে টোমারোই Neal Purvis and Robert Wade Pierce Brosnan After Bond is released from one year in North Korean captivity for killing General Moon, he tries to discover who betrayed him, teaming up with female American agent. Eventually he finds out Moon's henchmen have ties to mysterious diamond dealer, Gustav Graves. ''কেসিনো রয়েল'' ২০০৬ মার্টিন ক্যামপবেল Neal Purvis, Robert Wade, Paul Haggis Daniel Craig Bond, in his first assignment as '00' agent, attempts to frustrate the schemes of terrorist financier Le Chiffre by defeating him at high-stakes game of Texas hold 'em poker at Casino Royale in Montenegro. In the meantime he falls in love with treasury employee Vesper Lynd, who turns out to have an agenda of her own. ''কোয়ান্টম অব সোলাস'' ২০০৮ মার্ক ফোস্টার Bond pursues Quantum, the organisation he believes responsible for the death of Vesper Lynd. Along with Camille Montes, young woman seeking revenge, he goes after corrupt General Medrano, who plans with Quantum to stage military coup in Bolivia and hijack "one of the world's most precious natural resources". ==২০১০== চলচ্চিত্র বছর পরিচালক Screenwriter(s) জেমস বন্ড অভিনেতা গল্প ''স্কাইফল'' ২০১২ Sam Mendes Neal Purvis, Robert Wade, John Logan ড্রেনিয়েল ক্রুগ Events in M's past bring into question 007's loyalty to her; with MI6 coming under attack, Bond must find and destroy the source of the trouble, whatever the cost. ''স্পেক্টম (২০১৫ চলচ্চিত্র)'' ২০১৫ Neal Purvis, Robert Wade, John Logan, Jez Butterworth As Gareth Mallory, the newly appointed M, continues fighting political pressures that threaten the future of এমআই৬, Bond follows trail that leads to the sinister organisation known as SPECTRE and an enemy from his past. ==তথ্যসূত্র== তালিকা