'''রেমব্রান্ট হারমেনজেই ফান রেইন''' () (১৫ই জুলাই, ১৬০৬ বা ১৬০৭– ৪ই অক্টোবর, ১৬৬৯) হল্যান্ডের সবচেয়ে বিখ্যাত শিল্পী এবং ইউরোপের ইতিহাসের সেরা চিত্রশিল্পী একজন। ১৭শ শতকে ওলন্দাজ স্বর্ণযুগের সময় তিনি অসামান্য আবদান রাখেন। == রেমব্রন্টের আঁকা চিত্রকর্মের গ্যালারি == Image:Rembrandt Self-portrait হ্রদের ওপর ঝড়ের মাঝে যিশূ (Christ in the Storm on the Lake of Galilee)'', ১৬৩৩। ক্যানভাসে তৈলচিত্র Image:Rembrandt Harmensz. van Rijn The Abduction of Europa Google Art Project.jpg|'' উইরোপা অপহরন (The Abduction of Europa) '', ১৬৩২। তৈলচিত্র File:Rembrandt Harmensz. van Rijn রূপক ব্যাখ্যা (Parable of the Hidden Treasure)'', c. ১৬৩০ File:Jeremiah জেরুজালেম ধ্বংসের শোক (Jeremiah Lamenting the Destruction of Jerusalem),'' c. ১৬৩০ File:L'Apôtre Paul sa table de the Apostle in Meditation'' c. 1630 Image:Rembrandt The Philosopher in Philosopher in Meditation'', 1632 Image:The Anatomy Lesson of Dr. Nicolaes Tulp'', 1632 Image:Johannes Wtenbogaert by Rembrandt van of Johannes Wtenbogaert, 1633 preacher, like many of the best portraits of the 1630s Image:Rembrandt Abraham en Isaac, and Isaac'', 1634 File:Descent from the Cross from the Cross'', 1634 Image:Rembrandt Harmensz. van Rijn as Flora'', 1635 Image:Rembrandt en Saskia in De Verloren Zoon and Saskia pose as "The Prodigal Son in the Tavern" portrait historié, 1635 Image:Rembrandt Harmensz. van Rijn 041.jpg|''The Blinding of Samson'', 1636, which Rembrandt gave to Huygens Feast'', 1636-8 Image:Rembrandt De aartsengel verlaat Tobias en zijn gezin. 1637.jpg|''The Archangel leaving Tobias'', 1637 Image:Rembrandt The Risen Christ Appearing to Mary Magdalen Risen Christ Appearing to Mary Magdalen'', 1638 File:Rembrandt Krajobraz miłosiernym Landscape with Good Samaritan'', 1638 Image:The Mill-1645 1648-Rembrandt van Rijn.jpg|''The Mill'', 1648 Image:Rembrandt woman'', modelled by Hendrickje, 1654 Image:Rembrandt Harmensz. van Rijn at Her Bath'', also modelled by Hendrickje, 1654 Image:Rembrandt Harmensz. van Rijn of the later mayor Jan Six, wealthy friend of Rembrandt, 1654 Image:Rembrandt Christus aan het volk presented to the People'', drypoint, 1655, State of VIII Image:Rembrandt Old of an Old Woman'', 1655 Blessing the Sons of Joseph'', 1656 Image:Rembrandt forstandere Syndics of the Drapers' Guild'', 1662 Conspiracy of Claudius Civilis'' (cut-down), 1661–62 File:Rembrandt Harmensz van Rijn Return of the Prodigal Son Google Art Return of the Prodigal Son'', c. 1669 Image:Rembrandt Susanna and the Elders'', drawing, 1634 Image:Jesus und and the woman taken in adultery'', drawing Image:Virgin and child with and Child with Cat'', 1654. Original copper etching plate above, example of the print below == বহিঃসংযোগ == The Rembrandt Database Rembrandt and the art of compromise Interpretations of Rembrandt's images at "Rembrandt for sale" The Guardian, 18 September 2009 Works and literature on Rembrandt biography of the artist Rembrandt Harmensz. van Rijn from the J. Paul Getty Museum Rembrandt's Late Religious Portraits at the National Gallery of Art, Washington Etchings by Rembrandt at the Museum of New Zealand Te Papa Tongarewa Rembrandt's house in Amsterdam Site has good images of many of his etchings Web Catalogue of Rembrandt's Paintings Over 600 paintings, including former and disputed attributions, divided into categories. over 300 Rembrandt prints with dimensions and reference numbers, many with images. Boston MFA Good images of almost all of Rembrandt's etchings. ca. 400 images. Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam Rembrandt Research Project Encyclopædia Britannica article Rembrandt van Rijn Life and Art Biblical art by Rembrandt Harmensz. van Rijn Themed collection The Rembrandt Signature Files. Information about Rembrandt's name and signatures. Rembrandt Privé Documents regarding Rembrandt's life, kept at the Amsterdam City Archives (in Dutch) Save rembrandt from the experts Prints People: Social History of Printed Pictures exhibition catalog from the Metropolitan Museum of Art -available as PDF- which contains material on Rembrandt prints জন্ম মৃত্যু চিত্রশিল্পী