'''একাডেমি সম্মানসূচক পুরস্কার''' একাডেমি পুরস্কারগুলোর একটি যা ১৯২৮ সাল থেকে অনিয়মিতভাবে প্রদান করা হচ্ছে। একাডেমি অফ মোশন পিকচার আর্টস অ্যান্ড সাইন্সেস এটি প্রদান করে। চলচ্চিত্রের যে বিষয়গুলো অস্তিত্বশীল একাডেমি পুরস্কারের কোন ক্ষেত্রের মধ্যে পড়েনা সেগুলোকে পুরস্কৃত করার জন্যই এর প্রচলন করা হয়। বর্তমানে মূলত আজীবন অর্জনের ভিত্তিতে এই পুরস্কার দেয়া হয়ে থাকে। ==বিজয়ীদের তালিকা== :সূত্র: যেসব বছরের জন্যে '''বিশেষ পুরস্কার''' এবং '''সম্মানসূচক পুরস্কার''' বিজয়ীগণ তাদের পুরস্কার পেয়েছেন এবং বার্ষিক একাডেমি পুরস্কার অনুষ্ঠান যেখানে তারা পুরস্কার গ্রহণ করেছেন তা বাক্যাংশ দ্বারা আলাদা করা হয়েছে। এই তালিকাটি ''অফিসিয়াল একাডেমি অ্যাওয়ার্ডস ডাটাবেজ'' এবং ওয়েব -ভিত্তিক এএমপিএএস -এর আনুষ্ঠানিক নথিপত্র অনুযায়ী তৈরি হয়েছে। বব হোপকে চারটি ভিন্ন অনুষ্ঠানে সম্মাননা দেওয়া হয়। ===১৯২০-এর দশক=== বছর বিজয়ীর নাম কারণ পুরস্কার ১৯২৭/১৯২৮ ওয়ার্নার ব্রস. “দ্য জ্যাজ সিঙ্গার (১৯২৭) প্রযোজনার জন্য, সবাক চলচ্চিত্রের পথপ্রদর্শক যা বিনোদনজগতে বিপ্লবী পরিবর্তন এনেছে।” মূর্তি চার্লি চ্যাপলিন “দ্য সার্কাস (১৯২৮) চলচ্চিত্রে এবং প্রযোজনার জন্য।” মূর্তি ১৯২৮/১৯২৯ ''পুরস্কার প্রদান করা হয়নি'' ১৯২৯/১৯৩০ ''পুরস্কার প্রদান করা হয়নি'' ===১৯৩০-এর দশক=== বছর বিজয়ীর নাম কারণ পুরস্কার ১৯৩০/১৯৩১ ''পুরস্কার প্রদান করা হয়নি'' ১৯৩১/১৯৩২ ওয়াল্ট ডিজনি “মিকি মাউস সৃষ্টির জন্য।” মূর্তি ১৯৩২/১৯৩৩ ''পুরস্কার প্রদান করা হয়নি'' ১৯৩৪ শার্লি টেম্পল "in grateful recognition of her outstanding contribution to screen entertainment during the year 1934." ক্ষুদ্রাকার মূর্তি ১৯৩৫ ডি ডব্লিউ গ্রিফিথ "For his distinguished creative achievements as director and producer and his invaluable initiative and lasting contributions to the progress of the motion picture arts." মূর্তি ১৯৩৬ দ্য মার্চ অব টাইম "for its significance to motion pictures and for having revolutionized one of the most important branches of the industry the newsreel." ডব্লিউ হাওয়ার্ড গ্রিন এবং হ্যারল্ড রজোন "for the color cinematography of the Selznick International Production, ''The Garden of Allah''." ফলক ১৯৩৭ এডগার বার্গেন "for his outstanding comedy creation, 'Charlie McCarthy'." Wooden statuette, with movable mouth ডব্লিউ হাওয়ার্ড গ্রিন "for the color photography of ''A Star Is Born''." Plaque মিউজিয়াম অফ মডার্ন আর্ট "for its significant work in collecting films dating from 1895 to the present and for the first time making available to the public the means of studying the historical and aesthetic development of the motion picture as one of the major arts." Scroll certificate ম্যাক সেনেট "for his lasting contribution to the comedy technique of the screen, the basic principles of which are as important today as when they were first put into practice, the Academy presents Special Award to that master of fun, discoverer of stars, sympathetic, kindly, understanding comedy genius Mack Sennett." Statuette ১৯৩৮ জে. আর্থার বল "for his outstanding contributions to the advancement of color in Motion Picture Photography." Scroll ওয়াল্ট ডিজনি "for ''Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs'' 1937, recognized as significant screen innovation which has charmed millions and pioneered great new entertainment field for the motion picture cartoon." One statuette and seven miniature statuettes on stepped base ডিয়েনা ডারবিন এবং মিকি রুনি "for their significant contribution in bringing to the screen the spirit and personification of youth, and as juvenile players setting high standard of ability and achievement." Miniature statuette Jan Domela, Devereaux Jennings, Irmin Roberts, Art Smith, Farciot Edouart, Loyal Griggs, Loren L. Ryder, Harry D. Mills, Louis Mesenkop, Walter Oberst "for outstanding achievement in creating Special Photographic and Sound Effects in the Paramount production, ''Spawn of the North''." Plaque and Allen Davey "for the color cinematography of the production, Plaque "in recognition of patriotic service in the production of historical short subjects presenting significant episodes in the early struggle of the American people for liberty." Scroll ১৯৩৯ "recognizing the unique and outstanding contribution of Douglas Fairbanks, first President of the Academy, to the international development of the motion picture." Statuette "for her outstanding performance as screen juvenile during the past year." Miniature statuette "for outstanding achievement in the use of color for the enhancement of dramatic mood in the production of ''Gone with the Wind''." Plaque acknowledging the outstanding services to the industry during the past year of the Motion Picture Relief Fund and its progressive leadership. Presented to Jean Hersholt, President; Ralph Morgan, Chairman of the Executive Committee; Ralph Block, First Vice-President; and Conrad Nagel. Plaque "for its contributions in successfully bringing three-color feature production to the screen." Statuette ===১৯৪০-এর দশক=== Year Recipient Notes Award 1940 "in recognition of his unselfish services to the Motion Picture Industry." Silver plaque "for his outstanding service to the industry and the Army during the past nine years, which has made possible the present efficient mobilization of the motion picture industry facilities for the production of Army Training Films." Statuette 1941 ওয়াল্ট ডিজনি, William Garity, John N. A. Hawkins, and the RCA Manufacturing Company "for their outstanding contribution to the advancement of the use of sound in motion pictures through the production of ''Fantasia''." Certificate of Merit and his associates "for their unique achievement in the creation of new form of visualized music in Walt Disney's production, ''Fantasia'', thereby widening the scope of the motion picture as entertainment and as an art form. Certificate of Merit "for his extraordinary achievement in producing ''Kukan'', the film record of China's struggle, including its photography with 16mm camera under the most difficult and dangerous conditions." Certificate of Merit British Ministry of Information "for its vivid and dramatic presentation of the heroism of the RAF in the documentary film, ''Target for Tonight''. Certificate of Merit 1942 "for his progressive cultural achievement in establishing the French Research Foundation in Los Angeles as source of reference for the Hollywood Motion Picture Industry" Certificate of Merit "for his outstanding production achievement in ''In Which We Serve''" Certificate of Merit "for its achievement in representing the American Way of Life in the production of the 'Andy Hardy' series of films." Certificate of Merit 1943 "for the development of novel methods and techniques in the production of short subjects known as Puppetoons." Plaque; replaced with statuette in 1967 1944 "for his many services to the Academy." Life membership in the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences "outstanding child actress of 1944." Miniature Statuette (presented in 1946) 1945 Republic Studio, Daniel J. Bloomberg and the Republic Studio Sound Department "for the building of an outstanding musical scoring auditorium which provides optimum recording conditions and combines all elements of acoustic and engineering design. Certificate (presented in 1946) "for his six years service as President of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences." Special Plaque ''The House Live In'' tolerance short subject; produced by Frank Ross and Mervyn LeRoy; directed by Mervyn LeRoy; screenplay by Albert Maltz; song "The House Live In", music by Earl Robinson, lyrics by Lewis Allan; starring Frank Sinatra; released by RKO Radio. Certificate "outstanding child actress of 1945." Miniature Statuette (presented in 1947) 1946 "for bringing hope and courage to his fellow veterans through his appearance in ''The Best Years of Our Lives''" Statuette "for his outstanding achievement as actor, producer and director in bringing Henry to the screen." Statuette "for his distinguished contributions to the art of the motion picture." Certificate "outstanding child actor of 1946. Miniature Statuette 1947 "for his able and heart-warming of Uncle Remus, friend and story teller to the children of the world in Walt Disney's ''Song of the South''." Statuette Thomas Armat, Colonel William N. Selig, Albert E. Smith, and George Kirke Spoor members of "the small group of pioneers whose belief in new medium, and whose contributions to its development, blazed the trail along which the motion picture has progressed, in their lifetime, from obscurity to world-wide acclaim." Statuette ''Bill and Coo'' "in which artistry and patience blended in novel and entertaining use of the medium of motion pictures." Plaque; replaced with Statuette in 1976 ''Shoe-Shine'' (Italian: ''Sciuscià'') the high quality of this motion picture, brought to eloquent life in country scarred by war, is proof to the world that the creative spirit can triumph over adversity. Statuette 1948 "for distinguished service to the industry in adding to its moral stature in the world community by his production of the picture ''Joan of Arc''." Statuette ''Monsieur Vincent'' voted by the Academy Board of Governors as the most outstanding foreign language film released in the United States during 1948. Statuette "master showman, who raised the standard of exhibition of motion pictures." Statuette "a man who has been called the father of the feature film in America, for his services to the industry over period of forty years." Statuette 1949 "in recognition of his service to the Academy during four terms as president." Statuette on square wood base "for his unique artistry and his contributions to the technique of musical pictures." Statuette "distinguished motion picture pioneer for 37 years of brilliant showmanship." Statuette ''লাদ্রি দি বিচিক্লেত্তে'' voted by the Academy Board of Governors as the most outstanding foreign language film released in the United States during 1949. Statuette ===১৯৫০-এর দশক=== Year Recipient Notes Award 1950 "for distinguished service to the motion picture industry.” Statuette "for his services in interpreting the film industry to the country at large.” Statuette ''The Walls of Malapaga'' (Italian: ''Le mura di Malapaga'', French: ''Au-delà des grilles'') voted by the Board of Governors as the most outstanding foreign language film released in the United States in 1950. Statuette 1951 "in appreciation of his versatility as an actor, singer, director and dancer, and specifically for his brilliant achievements in the art of choreography on film." Statuette ''রাশোমোন'' voted by the Board of Governors as the most outstanding foreign language film released in the United States during 1951. Statuette 1952 "for his many innovations and contributions to the art of motion pictures.” Statuette "for his contribution to the laughter of the world, his service to the motion picture industry, and his devotion to the American premise.” Statuette "master comedian and good citizen.” Statuette "for the design and development of the camera which bears his name and for his continued and dominant presence in the field of Statuette "for long and distinguished service to the motion picture industry.” Statuette ''Forbidden Games'' (French: ''Jeux interdits'') Best Foreign Language Film first released in the United States during 1952. Statuette 1953 টুয়েন্টিয়েথ সেঞ্চুরি ফক্স "in recognition of their imagination, showmanship and foresight in introducing the revolutionary process known as CinemaScope.” Statuette Bell and Howell Company "for their pioneering and basic achievements in the advancement of the motion picture industry.” Statuette "for his conscientious, open-minded and dignified management of the Motion Picture Production Code” Statuette "for his witty and pungent observations on the American scene in his series of 'Pete Smith Specialties'.” Statuette 1954 Bausch Lomb Optical Company "for their contributions to the advancement of the motion picture industry.” Statuette "for his unique talents, his service to the Academy, the motion picture industry, and the American people.” Statuette "for the development of the Renovare Process which has made possible the restoration of the Library of Congress Paper Film Collection.” Statuette গ্রেটা গার্বো "for her unforgettable screen performances.” Statuette "for his outstanding juvenile performance in ''The Little Kidnappers'' Miniature Statuette "for his outstanding juvenile performance in ''The Little Kidnappers'' Miniature Statuette ''Gate of Hell'' (Japanese: ''Jigokumon'') Best Foreign Language Film first released in the United States during 1954. Statuette 1955 ''Samurai, The Legend of Musashi'' Best Foreign Language Film first released in the United States during 1955. Statuette 1956 “for distinguished service to the film industry.” Statuette 1957 Society of Motion Picture and Television Engineers (SMPTE) "for their contributions to the advancement of the motion picture industry.” Statuette Gilbert M. "Broncho Billy" Anderson "motion picture pioneer, for his contributions to the development of motion pictures as entertainment.” Statuette "for outstanding service to the Academy.” Statuette "for distinguished service to the motion picture industry.” Statuette 1958 “for his contributions to the world of entertainment for more than half century.” Statuette 1959 বাস্টার কিটন "for his unique talents which brought immortal comedies to the screen.” Statuette "for his pioneering inventions which brought sound to the motion picture.” Statuette ===১৯৬০-এর দশক=== Year Recipient Notes Award 1960 "for his many memorable screen performances and the international recognition he, as an individual, has gained for the motion picture industry." Statuette "for his creative pioneering in the field of cinema comedy." Statuette "for Pollyanna, the most outstanding juvenile performance during 1960." Miniature Statuette 1961 "for his outstanding patriotic service in the conception, writing and production of the Marine Corps film, ''A Force in Readiness'', which has brought honor to the Academy and the motion picture industry." Statuette "for his dedication and outstanding service to the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences." Statuette "for his brilliant achievements in the art of choreography on film." Statuette 1962 ''No award'' 1963 ''No award'' 1964 "for his outstanding make-up achievement for ''7 Faces of Dr. Lao''." Statuette 1965 "for unique and distinguished service to our industry and the Academy." Gold Medal 1966 "for achievements as stunt man and for developing safety devices to protect stunt men everywhere." Statuette "for unusual and outstanding service to the Academy during his thirty years in Hollywood." Statuette 1967 "for distinguished service to the Academy and the production of six top-rated Awards telecasts." Statuette 1968 "for his outstanding makeup achievement for ''Planet of the Apes''." Statuette "for her outstanding choreography achievement for ''Oliver!''." Statuette 1969 "for his unique mastery of the art of screen acting with the respect and affection of his colleagues." Statuette ===১৯৭০-এর দশক=== Year Recipient Notes Award 1970 "for superlative artistry and for distinguished contribution to the progress of motion pictures." Statuette অরসন ওয়েলস "for superlative artistry and versatility in the creation of motion pictures." Statuette 1971 চার্লি চ্যাপলিন "for the incalculable effect he has had in making motion pictures the art form of this century." Statuette 1972 "Leader for 38 years of the industry's enlightened labor relations and architect of its policy of With the respect and affection of all who work in films." Statuette "who achieved greatness as player, patron of the arts and dedicated citizen...in sum, Renaissance man. From his friends in the industry he loves." Statuette 1973 "for his devotion to the art of film, his massive contributions in preserving its past and his unswerving faith in its future." Statuette "in recognition of his brilliant creativity and for the unequalled achievements of the Marx Brothers in the art of motion picture comedy." Statuette 1974 হাওয়ার্ড হক্‌স "A master American filmmaker whose creative efforts hold distinguished place in world cinema." Statuette জঁ রনোয়ার "a genius who, with grace, responsibility and enviable devotion through silent film, sound film, feature, documentary and television, has won the world's admiration." Statuette 1975 "in recognition of her unique contributions to the film industry and the development of film as an artistic medium." Statuette 1976 ''No award'' 1977 "for her exceptional contribution to the art of film editing in the motion picture industry." Statuette 1978 "for bringing joy and laughter to every part of the world through his unique animated motion pictures." Statuette "for the full body of his work, for the unique achievements of his entire career and his lifetime of contribution to the art of film." Statuette "for his incomparable achievements as cinematic creator and innovator." Statuette "for the contribution it has made to the public's perception of movies as an art form." Statuette 1979 "for his dedication and distinguished service to the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences." Statuette "for advancing the art of screen acting through host of memorable and distinguished performances." Statuette (Posthumous) ===১৯৮০-এর দশক=== Year Recipient Notes Award 1980 "the consummate actor, in recognition of his brilliant accomplishments and enduring contribution to the art of motion pictures." Statuette 1981 "for superlative creativity and unique contribution to the art of screen acting." Statuette 1982 "in recognition of his 60 years of versatility in variety of memorable film performances." Statuette 1983 "in recognition of his unparalleled record of distinguished contributions to the motion picture art form." Statuette 1984 "for his fifty years of memorable performances. For his high ideals both on and off the screen. With the respect and affection of his colleagues." Statuette "in recognition of its 20th anniversary and its dedicated commitment to fostering artistic and creative activity and excellence in every area of the arts." Statuette 1985 পল নিউম্যান "in recognition of his many and memorable compelling screen performances and for his personal integrity and dedication to his craft." Statuette "in recognition of his brilliant artistry in the creation of memorable music for host of distinguished motion pictures." Statuette 1986 "for his unique artistry and his distinguished service to the profession of acting." Statuette 1987 ''No award'' 1988 ইস্টম্যান কোডাক "in recognition of the company's fundamental contributions to the art of motion pictures during the first century of film history." Statuette "in recognition of its 50th anniversary and its dedicated commitment to originate artistic, creative and technological activity and excellence in every area of film making." Statuette 1989 আকিরা কুরোসাওয়া "for cinematic accomplishments that have inspired, delighted, enriched and entertained worldwide audiences and influenced filmmakers throughout the world." Statuette ===১৯৯০-এর দশক=== Year Recipient Notes Award 1990 সোফিয়া লরেন "one of the genuine treasures of world cinema who, in career rich with memorable performances, has added permanent luster to our art form." Statuette "in recognition of her extraordinary qualities both on screen and off, with appreciation for lifetime's worth of indelible performances." Statuette 1991 সত্যজিৎ রায় "in recognition of his rare mastery of the art of motion pictures, and of his profound humanitarian outlook, which has had an indelible influence on filmmakers and audiences throughout the world." Statuette 1992 ফেদেরিকো ফেল্লিনি "in recognition of his cinematic accomplishments that have thrilled and entertained worldwide audiences." Statuette 1993 "in appreciation for full career's worth of elegant and beautifully crafted performances." Statuette 1994 মিকেলাঞ্জেলো আন্তোনিওনি "in recognition of his place as one of the cinema's master visual stylists." Statuette 1995 "for 50 years as creative and moral force in the motion picture community." Statuette "for the creation of classic cartoons and cartoon characters whose animated lives have brought joy to our real ones for more than half century." Statuette 1996 "in recognition of his services to the art of the dance in the art of the screen." Statuette 1997 "in appreciation of body of work marked by grace, elegance, wit and visual innovation." Statuette 1998 এলিয়া কাজান "in appreciation of long, distinguished and unparalleled career during which he has influenced the very nature of filmmaking through his creation of cinematic masterpieces." Statuette ১৯৯৯ "in recognition of five decades of extraordinary film direction." Statuette ===২০০০-এর দশক=== Year Recipient Notes Award 2000 "master of light and color." Statuette "in appreciation of body of varied and enduring work." Statuette 2001 "in recognition of his remarkable accomplishments as an artist and as human." Statuette "Actor, director, producer, creator of Sundance, inspiration to independent and innovative filmmakers everywhere." Statuette 2002 "whose remarkable talents have provided cinema history with some of its most memorable characters." Statuette 2003 "in recognition of his writing, directing and producing an extraordinary body of work for the screen." Statuette 2004 সিডনি লুমেট "in recognition of his brilliant services to screenwriters, performers and the art of the motion picture." Statuette 2005 "in recognition of career that has repeatedly reinvented the art form and inspired filmmakers and audiences alike." Statuette 2006 "in recognition of his magnificent and multifaceted contributions to the art of film music." Statuette 2007 "in recognition of one of cinema's great careers in art direction." Statuette ২০০৮ ''No award'' 2009 "in recognition of her central place in the Golden Age of motion pictures." Statuette "for his rich engendering of films and filmmakers." Statuette "for unsurpassed mastery of light, shadow, color and motion." Statuette ===২০১০-এর দশক=== Year Recipient Notes Award 2010 "for the wise and devoted chronicling of the cinematic parade." Statuette জঁ-লুক গদার "for passion. for confrontation. for new kind of cinema." Statuette "for lifetime's worth of indelible screen characters." Statuette 2011 "for his legacy of consistent excellence and uncommon versatility" Statuette "for his unparalleled mastery of texture, shade, form and illusion" Statuette 2012 "..Has inspired generations of filmmakers with his "you are here" style. He is considered one of the founders of the cinéma vérité movement..." Statuette "A pioneer in improving stunt technology and safety procedures..." Statuette "A tireless champion of the arts in America and especially that most American of arts: the Hollywood film" Statuette 2013 "an entertainment icon who has created some of cinema's most memorable characters, inspiring generations of actors." Statuette "in recognition of his extraordinary talents and the unique inspiration he has brought to the art of motion pictures." Statuette "a visionary whose incomparable costume designs shaped timeless, living art in motion pictures." Statuette ২০১৪ Statuette হায়াও মিয়াজাকি "has deeply influenced animation forever, inspiring generations of artists to work in our medium and illuminate its limitless potential..." Statuette "One of Hollywood's brightest stars, whose inspiring performances glowed with passion, warmth and strength." Statuette 2015 স্পাইক লি "a champion of independent film and an inspiration to young filmmakers" Statuette "an original talent whose devotion to her craft has earned her worldwide recognition as an independent film icon" Statuette 2016 জ্যাকি চ্যান "He starred in and sometimes wrote, directed and produced more than 30 martial arts features in his native Hong Kong, charming audiences with his dazzling athleticism, inventive stunt work and boundless charisma." Statuette "Over five decades, he applied his talents to more than 200 feature films... and has been instrumental in the careers of celebrated actors" Statuette "In her more than 60 years as film editor, she has worked side by side with many leading directors on an impressive range of films" Statuette "Wiseman has made one film almost every year since 1967, illuminating lives in the context of social, cultural and government institutions" Statuette 2017 Statuette Statuette Statuette Statuette ==টীকা== ==তথ্যসূত্র== "Academy Award Statistics". ''Official Academy Awards Database''. Accessed July 28, 2008. "Honorary Award". ''Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences'', ''oscars.org'' (official website). Accessed July 28, 2008. (2 pages.) "Honorary Awards: Special Awards and Honorary Awards". Searchable ''Awards Database''. ''Official Academy Awards Database''. Accessed July 28, 2008. পুরস্কার সম্মানসূচক পুরস্কার বিজয়ী