'''ক্যারিনা''' দক্ষিণ দিকের আকাশে দৃশ্যমান একটি নক্ষত্রমণ্ডল। ল্যাটিন ভাষায় ক্যারিনা শব্দের অর্থ "জাহাজের তলদেশ", আর এটি পূর্বে "আর্গো নেভিস" নামের একটি বৃহৎ নক্ষত্রমণ্ডলের অংশ ছিল(আর্গো জাহাজ)। পরবর্তীতে মূল তিনটি অংশে বিভক্ত করা হয় যার একটি ক্যারিনা, আর অন্য দুটি ভেলা (জাহাজের ডেক) পাপিস মণ্ডল (জাহাজের পাল)। == ইতিহাস পৌরাণিক কাহিনী == ক্যারিনা এক সময় আর্গো নেভিস এর অংশ ছিল। এটি ছিল জেসন এবং আর্গোনটস এর বিশাল জাহাজ যারা সোনালী ভেড়ার চামড়ার সন্ধানে ছিল। প্রাচীন গ্রিসে আর্গো তারামণ্ডলের সূচনা ঘটে। তবে, আর্গো নেভিস এর বিশাল আকার এবং এর অন্তর্ভুক্ত বৃহৎ সংখ্যক তারাগুলোর আলাদা নামকরণের প্রয়োজন হওয়ায়, নিকোলাস-লুই দ্য ল্যাসেল ১৭৬৩ সালে আর্গো নেভিসকে তিনটি অংশে বিভক্ত করেন, যার মধ্যে ক্যারিনা (জাহাজের তলদেশ) অন্তর্ভুক্ত। উনবিংশ শতকে এই তিনটি তারামণ্ডল পৃথক তারামণ্ডল হিসেবে প্রতিষ্ঠিত হয়, এবং ১৯৩০ সালে আনুষ্ঠানিকভাবে আইএইউ এর ৮৮টি আধুনিক তারামণ্ডলের তালিকায় অন্তর্ভুক্ত হয়। ল্যাসেল সম্পূর্ণ আর্গো নেভিসের তারাগুলোর নামকরণের জন্য কেবলমাত্র এক সেট গ্রিক অক্ষর ব্যবহার করেন, এবং তিনটি অংশের জন্য আলাদা আলাদা ল্যাটিন অক্ষর ব্যবহার করেন। কারণে, ক্যারিনায় α, ε, ভেলা মন্ডলে δ, পাপিস মণ্ডলে প্রভৃতি রয়েছে। ==লক্ষ্যনীয় বৈশিষ্ট্য== খালি চোখে ক্যারিনা মণ্ডল === তারা === ক্যারিনাতে রয়েছে ক্যানোপাস নামের একটি শ্বেত-বর্ণের অতিদানব তারা যেটি রাতের আকাশে দ্বিতীয় উজ্জ্বলতম তারা। এর আপাত মান -.৭২ এটি পৃথিবী থেকে ৩১৩ আলোকবর্ষ দূরে অবস্থিত। এর পূর্বের নাম ছিল আলফা ক্যারিনা। এটি একটি বিষমতারা যার আপাতমান প্রায় ০.১ মান পর্যন্ত উঠানামা করে। এর প্রচলিত নামটি রাখা হয়েছে পৌরাণিক চরিত্র ক্যানোপাসের নামে যিনি স্পার্টার রাজা মেনেলসের অধীনে একজন সাগর-অভিযাত্রী ছিলেন। There are several other stars above magnitude in Carina. Beta Carinae, traditionally called Miaplacidus, is blue-white hued star of magnitude 1.7, 111 light-years from Earth. Epsilon Carinae is an orange-hued giant star similarly bright to Miaplacidus at magnitude 1.9; it is 630 light-years from Earth. Another fairly bright star is the blue-white hued Theta Carinae; it is magnitude 2.7 star 440 light-years from Earth. Theta Carinae is also the most prominent member of the cluster IC 2602. Iota Carinae is white-hued supergiant star of magnitude 2.2, 690 light-years from Earth. Eta Carinae is the most prominent variable star in Carina; with mass of approximately 100 solar masses and million times as bright as the Sun. It was first discovered to be unusual in 1677, when its magnitude suddenly rose to 4, attracting the attention of Edmond Halley. Eta Carinae is inside NGC 3372, commonly called the Carina Nebula. It had long outburst in 1827, when it brightened to magnitude 1, only fading to magnitude 1.5 in 1828. Its most prominent outburst made Eta Carinae the equal of Sirius; it brightened to magnitude −1.5 in 1843. However, since 1843, Eta Carinae has remained relatively placid, having magnitude between 6.5 and 7.9. However, in 1998, it brightened again, though only to magnitude 5.0, far less drastic outburst. Eta Carinae is binary star, with companion that has period of 5.5 years; the two stars are surrounded by the Homunculus Nebula, which is composed of gas that was ejected in 1843. There are several less prominent variable stars in Carina. Carinae is Cepheid variable noted for its brightness; it is the brightest Cepheid that is variable to the unaided eye. It is yellow-hued supergiant star with minimum magnitude of 4.2 and maximum magnitude of 3.3; it has period of 35.5 days. Two bright Mira variable stars are in Carina: Carinae and Carinae; both stars are red giants. Carinae has minimum magnitude of 10.0 and maximum magnitude of 4.0. Its period is 309 days and it is 416 light-years from Earth. Carinae is similar, with minimum magnitude of 10.0 and maximum magnitude of 5.0. However, Carinae has shorter period 150 days, though it is much more distant at 1300 light-years from Earth. Carina is home to several double stars and binary stars. Upsilon Carinae is binary star with two blue-white hued giant components, 1600 light-years from Earth. The primary is of magnitude 3.0 and the secondary is of magnitude 6.0; the two components are distinguishable in small amateur telescope. Two asterisms are prominent in Carina. One is known as the 'Diamond Cross', which is larger than the Southern Cross (but fainter), and, from the perspective of the southern hemisphere viewer, upside down, the long axes of the two crosses being close to parallel. Another asterism in the constellation is the False Cross, often mistaken for the Southern Cross, which is an asterism in Crux. The False Cross consists of two stars in Carina, Iota Carinae and Epsilon Carinae, and two stars in Vela, Kappa Velorum and Delta Velorum. === Deep-sky objects === Carina is known for its namesake nebula, NGC 3372, discovered by French astronomer Nicolas Louis de Lacaille in 1751, which contains several nebulae. The Carina Nebula overall is an extended emission nebula approximately 8,000 light-years away and 300 light-years wide that includes vast star-forming regions. It has an overall magnitude of 8.0 and an apparent diameter of over degrees. Its central region is called the Keyhole, or the Keyhole Nebula. This was described in 1847 by John Herschel, and likened to keyhole by Emma Converse in 1873. The Keyhole is about seven light-years wide and is composed mostly of ionized hydrogen, with two major star-forming regions. The Homunculus Nebula is planetary nebula visible to the naked eye that is being ejected by the erratic luminous blue variable star Eta Carinae, the most massive visible star known. Eta Carinae is so massive that it has reached the theoretical upper limit for the mass of star and is therefore unstable. It is known for its outbursts; in 1840 it briefly became one of the brightest stars in the sky due to particularly massive outburst, which largely created the Homunculus Nebula. Because of this instability and history of outbursts, Eta Carinae is considered prime supernova candidate for the next several hundred thousand years because it has reached the end of its estimated million-year life span. NGC 2516 is an open cluster that is both quite large (approximately half degree square) and bright, visible to the unaided eye. It is located 1100 light-years from Earth and has approximately 80 stars, the brightest of which is red giant star of magnitude 5.2. NGC 3114 is another open cluster approximately of the same size, though it is more distant at 3000 light-years from Earth. It is more loose and dim than NGC 2516, as its brightest stars are only 6th magnitude. The most prominent open cluster in Carina is IC 2602, also called the "Southern Pleiades". It contains Theta Carinae, along with several other stars visible to the unaided eye. In total, the cluster possesses approximately 60 stars. The Southern Pleiades is particularly large for an open cluster, with diameter of approximately one degree. Like IC 2602, NGC 3532 is visible to the unaided eye and is of comparable size. It possesses approximately 150 stars that are arranged in an unusual shape, approximating an ellipse with dark central area. Several prominent orange giants are among the cluster's bright stars, of the 7th magnitude. Superimposed on the cluster is Chi Carinae, yellow-white hued star of magnitude 3.9, far more distant than NGC 3532. Carina also contains the naked-eye globular cluster NGC 2808. Epsilon Carinae and Upsilon Carinae are double stars visible in small telescopes. One noted galaxy cluster is 1E 0657-56, the Bullet Cluster. At distance of billion light years (redshift 0.296), this galaxy cluster is named for the shock wave seen in the intracluster medium, which resembles the shock wave of supersonic bullet. The bow shock visible is thought to be due to the smaller galaxy cluster moving through the intracluster medium at relative speed of 3000–4000 kilometers per second to the larger cluster. Because this gravitational interaction has been ongoing for hundreds of millions of years, the smaller cluster is being destroyed and will eventually merge with the larger cluster. === উল্কা === ক্যারিনাতে ইটা ক্যারিনিডস্ উল্কা বৃষ্টির প্রভা রয়েছে, যেটি প্রতি বছর ২১শে জানুয়ারির দিকে সর্বোচ্চ মানে পৌছায়। == সমতুল বিষয় == From China (especially northern China), the stars of Carina can barely be seen. The star Canopus (the south polar star in Chinese astronomy) was located by Chinese astronomers in the Vermilion Bird of the South (南方朱雀, ''Nán Fāng Zhū Què''). The rest of the stars were first classified by Xu Guanggi during the Ming Dynasty, based on the knowledge acquired from western star charts, and placed among The Southern Asterisms (近南極星區, Polynesian peoples had no name for the constellation in particular, though they had many names for Canopus. The Māori name ''Ariki'' ("High-born"), and the Hawaiian ''Ke "The Chief of the southern expanse". both attest to the star's prominence in the southern sky, while the Māori ''Atutahi'', "First-light" or "Single-light", and the Tuamotu ''Te Tau-rari'' and refer to the star's solitary nature. It was also called ''Kapae-poto'', ("Short horizon"), because it rarely sets from the vantage point of New Zealand; and ''Kauanga'' ("Solitary"), when it was the last star visible before sunrise. ==ভবিষ্যৎ== The Southern Celestial Pole migrates through the constellation Carina. Carina is located in the southern sky near the south celestial pole, making it circumpolar for most of the southern hemisphere. Due to precession of Earth's axis, by the year 4700 the south celestial pole will be located in Carina. Three bright stars in Carina will come within degree of the southern celestial pole and take turns as the southern pole star: Omega Carinae (mag 3.29) in 5600, Upsilon Carinae (mag 2.97) in 6700, and Iota Carinae (mag 2.21) in 7900. About 13860, the bright Canopus (-0.7) will be less than degrees from the Celestial Pole, making it circumpolar in Bali. == নামকরণ == ছিল মার্কিন নৌবাহিনীর একটি কার্টার শ্রেণীর কার্গো জাহাজ যার নামকরণ করা হয় এই তারামণ্ডলের নামে। == আরও দেখুন == Carina (Chinese astronomy) List of brightest stars == তথ্যসূত্র ==